ACT I

_The scene is laid in the park on SORIN’S estate. A broad avenue of
trees leads away from the audience toward a lake which lies lost in
the depths of the park. The avenue is obstructed by a rough stage,
temporarily erected for the performance of amateur theatricals, and
which screens the lake from view. There is a dense growth of bushes to
the left and right of the stage. A few chairs and a little table are
placed in front of the stage. The sun has just set. JACOB and some other
workmen are heard hammering and coughing on the stage behind the lowered
curtain_.

MASHA and MEDVIEDENKO come in from the left, returning from a walk.

MEDVIEDENKO. Why do you always wear mourning?

MASHA. I dress in black to match my life. I am unhappy.

MEDVIEDENKO. Why should you be unhappy? [Thinking it over] I don’t
understand it. You are healthy, and though your father is not rich, he
has a good competency. My life is far harder than yours. I only have
twenty-three roubles a month to live on, but I don’t wear mourning.
[They sit down].

MASHA. Happiness does not depend on riches; poor men are often happy.

MEDVIEDENKO. In theory, yes, but not in reality. Take my case, for
instance; my mother, my two sisters, my little brother and I must all
live somehow on my salary of twenty-three roubles a month. We have to
eat and drink, I take it. You wouldn’t have us go without tea and sugar,
would you? Or tobacco? Answer me that, if you can.

MASHA. [Looking in the direction of the stage] The play will soon begin.

MEDVIEDENKO. Yes, Nina Zarietchnaya is going to act in Treplieff’s play.
They love one another, and their two souls will unite to-night in the
effort to interpret the same idea by different means. There is no ground
on which your soul and mine can meet. I love you. Too restless and sad
to stay at home, I tramp here every day, six miles and back, to be met
only by your indifference. I am poor, my family is large, you can have
no inducement to marry a man who cannot even find sufficient food for
his own mouth.

MASHA. It is not that. [She takes snuff] I am touched by your affection,
but I cannot return it, that is all. [She offers him the snuff-box] Will
you take some?

MEDVIEDENKO. No, thank you. [A pause.]

MASHA. The air is sultry; a storm is brewing for to-night. You do
nothing but moralise or else talk about money. To you, poverty is the
greatest misfortune that can befall a man, but I think it is a thousand
times easier to go begging in rags than to--You wouldn’t understand
that, though.

SORIN leaning on a cane, and TREPLIEFF come in.

SORIN. For some reason, my boy, country life doesn’t suit me, and I am
sure I shall never get used to it. Last night I went to bed at ten and
woke at nine this morning, feeling as if, from oversleep, my brain had
stuck to my skull. [Laughing] And yet I accidentally dropped off to
sleep again after dinner, and feel utterly done up at this moment. It is
like a nightmare.

TREPLIEFF. There is no doubt that you should live in town. [He catches
sight of MASHA and MEDVIEDENKO] You shall be called when the play
begins, my friends, but you must not stay here now. Go away, please.

SORIN. Miss Masha, will you kindly ask your father to leave the dog
unchained? It howled so last night that my sister was unable to sleep.

MASHA. You must speak to my father yourself. Please excuse me; I can’t
do so. [To MEDVIEDENKO] Come, let us go.

MEDVIEDENKO. You will let us know when the play begins?

MASHA and MEDVIEDENKO go out.

SORIN. I foresee that that dog is going to howl all night again. It is
always this way in the country; I have never been able to live as I like
here. I come down for a month’s holiday, to rest and all, and am
plagued so by their nonsense that I long to escape after the first day.
[Laughing] I have always been glad to get away from this place, but I
have been retired now, and this was the only place I had to come to.
Willy-nilly, one must live somewhere.

JACOB. [To TREPLIEFF] We are going to take a swim, Mr. Constantine.

TREPLIEFF. Very well, but you must be back in ten minutes.

JACOB. We will, sir.

TREPLIEFF. [Looking at the stage] Just like a real theatre! See,
there we have the curtain, the foreground, the background, and all. No
artificial scenery is needed. The eye travels direct to the lake, and
rests on the horizon. The curtain will be raised as the moon rises at
half-past eight.

SORIN. Splendid!

TREPLIEFF. Of course the whole effect will be ruined if Nina is late.
She should be here by now, but her father and stepmother watch her so
closely that it is like stealing her from a prison to get her away from
home. [He straightens SORIN’S collar] Your hair and beard are all on
end. Oughtn’t you to have them trimmed?

SORIN. [Smoothing his beard] They are the tragedy of my existence. Even
when I was young I always looked as if I were drunk, and all. Women have
never liked me. [Sitting down] Why is my sister out of temper?

TREPLIEFF. Why? Because she is jealous and bored. [Sitting down beside
SORIN] She is not acting this evening, but Nina is, and so she has set
herself against me, and against the performance of the play, and against
the play itself, which she hates without ever having read it.

SORIN. [Laughing] Does she, really?

TREPLIEFF. Yes, she is furious because Nina is going to have a
success on this little stage. [Looking at his watch] My mother is a
psychological curiosity. Without doubt brilliant and talented, capable
of sobbing over a novel, of reciting all Nekrasoff’s poetry by heart,
and of nursing the sick like an angel of heaven, you should see what
happens if any one begins praising Duse to her! She alone must be
praised and written about, raved over, her marvellous acting in “La Dame
aux Camelias” extolled to the skies. As she cannot get all that rubbish
in the country, she grows peevish and cross, and thinks we are all
against her, and to blame for it all. She is superstitious, too. She
dreads burning three candles, and fears the thirteenth day of the month.
Then she is stingy. I know for a fact that she has seventy thousand
roubles in a bank at Odessa, but she is ready to burst into tears if you
ask her to lend you a penny.

SORIN. You have taken it into your head that your mother dislikes your
play, and the thought of it has excited you, and all. Keep calm; your
mother adores you.

TREPLIEFF. [Pulling a flower to pieces] She loves me, loves me not;
loves--loves me not; loves--loves me not! [Laughing] You see, she
doesn’t love me, and why should she? She likes life and love and gay
clothes, and I am already twenty-five years old; a sufficient reminder
to her that she is no longer young. When I am away she is only
thirty-two, in my presence she is forty-three, and she hates me for
it. She knows, too, that I despise the modern stage. She adores it, and
imagines that she is working on it for the benefit of humanity and her
sacred art, but to me the theatre is merely the vehicle of convention
and prejudice. When the curtain rises on that little three-walled room,
when those mighty geniuses, those high-priests of art, show us people in
the act of eating, drinking, loving, walking, and wearing their coats,
and attempt to extract a moral from their insipid talk; when playwrights
give us under a thousand different guises the same, same, same old
stuff, then I must needs run from it, as Maupassant ran from the Eiffel
Tower that was about to crush him by its vulgarity.

SORIN. But we can’t do without a theatre.

TREPLIEFF. No, but we must have it under a new form. If we can’t do
that, let us rather not have it at all. [Looking at his watch] I love my
mother, I love her devotedly, but I think she leads a stupid life. She
always has this man of letters of hers on her mind, and the newspapers
are always frightening her to death, and I am tired of it. Plain, human
egoism sometimes speaks in my heart, and I regret that my mother is
a famous actress. If she were an ordinary woman I think I should be
a happier man. What could be more intolerable and foolish than my
position, Uncle, when I find myself the only nonentity among a crowd of
her guests, all celebrated authors and artists? I feel that they only
endure me because I am her son. Personally I am nothing, nobody. I
pulled through my third year at college by the skin of my teeth, as they
say. I have neither money nor brains, and on my passport you may read
that I am simply a citizen of Kiev. So was my father, but he was
a well-known actor. When the celebrities that frequent my mother’s
drawing-room deign to notice me at all, I know they only look at me
to measure my insignificance; I read their thoughts, and suffer from
humiliation.

SORIN. Tell me, by the way, what is Trigorin like? I can’t understand
him, he is always so silent.

TREPLIEFF. Trigorin is clever, simple, well-mannered, and a little, I
might say, melancholic in disposition. Though still under forty, he is
surfeited with praise. As for his stories, they are--how shall I put
it?--pleasing, full of talent, but if you have read Tolstoi or Zola you
somehow don’t enjoy Trigorin.

SORIN. Do you know, my boy, I like literary men. I once passionately
desired two things: to marry, and to become an author. I have succeeded
in neither. It must be pleasant to be even an insignificant author.

TREPLIEFF. [Listening] I hear footsteps! [He embraces his uncle] I
cannot live without her; even the sound of her footsteps is music to me.
I am madly happy. [He goes quickly to meet NINA, who comes in at that
moment] My enchantress! My girl of dreams!

NINA. [Excitedly] It can’t be that I am late? No, I am not late.

TREPLIEFF. [Kissing her hands] No, no, no!

NINA. I have been in a fever all day, I was so afraid my father would
prevent my coming, but he and my stepmother have just gone driving. The
sky is clear, the moon is rising. How I hurried to get here! How I urged
my horse to go faster and faster! [Laughing] I am _so_ glad to see you!
[She shakes hands with SORIN.]

SORIN. Oho! Your eyes look as if you had been crying. You mustn’t do
that.

NINA. It is nothing, nothing. Do let us hurry. I must go in half an
hour. No, no, for heaven’s sake do not urge me to stay. My father
doesn’t know I am here.

TREPLIEFF. As a matter of fact, it is time to begin now. I must call the
audience.

SORIN. Let me call them--and all--I am going this minute. [He goes
toward the right, begins to sing “The Two Grenadiers,” then stops.]
I was singing that once when a fellow-lawyer said to me: “You have a
powerful voice, sir.” Then he thought a moment and added, “But it is a
disagreeable one!” [He goes out laughing.]

NINA. My father and his wife never will let me come here; they call this
place Bohemia and are afraid I shall become an actress. But this lake
attracts me as it does the gulls. My heart is full of you. [She glances
about her.]

TREPLIEFF. We are alone.

NINA. Isn’t that some one over there?

TREPLIEFF. No. [They kiss one another.]

NINA. What is that tree?

TREPLIEFF. An elm.

NINA. Why does it look so dark?

TREPLIEFF. It is evening; everything looks dark now. Don’t go away
early, I implore you.

NINA. I must.

TREPLIEFF. What if I were to follow you, Nina? I shall stand in your
garden all night with my eyes on your window.

NINA. That would be impossible; the watchman would see you, and Treasure
is not used to you yet, and would bark.

TREPLIEFF. I love you.

NINA. Hush!

TREPLIEFF. [Listening to approaching footsteps] Who is that? Is it you,
Jacob?

JACOB. [On the stage] Yes, sir.

TREPLIEFF. To your places then. The moon is rising; the play must
commence.

NINA. Yes, sir.

TREPLIEFF. Is the alcohol ready? Is the sulphur ready? There must be
fumes of sulphur in the air when the red eyes shine out. [To NINA] Go,
now, everything is ready. Are you nervous?

NINA. Yes, very. I am not so much afraid of your mother as I am of
Trigorin. I am terrified and ashamed to act before him; he is so famous.
Is he young?

TREPLIEFF. Yes.

NINA. What beautiful stories he writes!

TREPLIEFF. [Coldly] I have never read any of them, so I can’t say.

NINA. Your play is very hard to act; there are no living characters in
it.

TREPLIEFF. Living characters! Life must be represented not as it is, but
as it ought to be; as it appears in dreams.

NINA. There is so little action; it seems more like a recitation. I
think love should always come into every play.

NINA and TREPLIEFF go up onto the little stage; PAULINA and DORN come
in.

PAULINA. It is getting damp. Go back and put on your goloshes.

DORN. I am quite warm.

PAULINA. You never will take care of yourself; you are quite obstinate
about it, and yet you are a doctor, and know quite well that damp air is
bad for you. You like to see me suffer, that’s what it is. You sat out
on the terrace all yesterday evening on purpose.

DORN. [Sings]

“Oh, tell me not that youth is wasted.”

PAULINA. You were so enchanted by the conversation of Madame Arkadina
that you did not even notice the cold. Confess that you admire her.

DORN. I am fifty-five years old.

PAULINA. A trifle. That is not old for a man. You have kept your looks
magnificently, and women still like you.

DORN. What are you trying to tell me?

PAULINA. You men are all ready to go down on your knees to an actress,
all of you.

DORN. [Sings]

“Once more I stand before thee.”

It is only right that artists should be made much of by society and
treated differently from, let us say, merchants. It is a kind of
idealism.

PAULINA. When women have loved you and thrown themselves at your head,
has that been idealism?

DORN. [Shrugging his shoulders] I can’t say. There has been a great deal
that was admirable in my relations with women. In me they liked, above
all, the superior doctor. Ten years ago, you remember, I was the only
decent doctor they had in this part of the country--and then, I have
always acted like a man of honour.

PAULINA. [Seizes his hand] Dearest!

DORN. Be quiet! Here they come.

ARKADINA comes in on SORIN’S arm; also TRIGORIN, SHAMRAEFF, MEDVIEDENKO,
and MASHA.

SHAMRAEFF. She acted most beautifully at the Poltava Fair in 1873; she
was really magnificent. But tell me, too, where Tchadin the comedian is
now? He was inimitable as Rasplueff, better than Sadofski. Where is he
now?

ARKADINA. Don’t ask me where all those antediluvians are! I know nothing
about them. [She sits down.]

SHAMRAEFF. [Sighing] Pashka Tchadin! There are none left like him. The
stage is not what it was in his time. There were sturdy oaks growing on
it then, where now but stumps remain.

DORN. It is true that we have few dazzling geniuses these days, but, on
the other hand, the average of acting is much higher.

SHAMRAEFF. I cannot agree with you; however, that is a matter of taste,
_de gustibus._

Enter TREPLIEFF from behind the stage.

ARKADINA. When will the play begin, my dear boy?

TREPLIEFF. In a moment. I must ask you to have patience.

ARKADINA. [Quoting from Hamlet] My son,

     “Thou turn’st mine eyes into my very soul;
     And there I see such black grained spots
     As will not leave their tinct.”

[A horn is blown behind the stage.]

TREPLIEFF. Attention, ladies and gentlemen! The play is about to begin.
[A pause] I shall commence. [He taps the door with a stick, and speaks
in a loud voice] O, ye time-honoured, ancient mists that drive at night
across the surface of this lake, blind you our eyes with sleep, and show
us in our dreams that which will be in twice ten thousand years!

SORIN. There won’t be anything in twice ten thousand years.

TREPLIEFF. Then let them now show us that nothingness.

ARKADINA. Yes, let them--we are asleep.

The curtain rises. A vista opens across the lake. The moon hangs low
above the horizon and is reflected in the water. NINA, dressed in white,
is seen seated on a great rock.

NINA. All men and beasts, lions, eagles, and quails, horned stags,
geese, spiders, silent fish that inhabit the waves, starfish from the
sea, and creatures invisible to the eye--in one word, life--all, all
life, completing the dreary round imposed upon it, has died out at last.
A thousand years have passed since the earth last bore a living creature
on her breast, and the unhappy moon now lights her lamp in vain. No
longer are the cries of storks heard in the meadows, or the drone of
beetles in the groves of limes. All is cold, cold. All is void, void,
void. All is terrible, terrible--[A pause] The bodies of all living
creatures have dropped to dust, and eternal matter has transformed them
into stones and water and clouds; but their spirits have flowed together
into one, and that great world-soul am I! In me is the spirit of the
great Alexander, the spirit of Napoleon, of Caesar, of Shakespeare,
and of the tiniest leech that swims. In me the consciousness of man has
joined hands with the instinct of the animal; I understand all, all,
all, and each life lives again in me.

[The will-o-the-wisps flicker out along the lake shore.]

ARKADINA. [Whispers] What decadent rubbish is this?

TREPLIEFF. [Imploringly] Mother!

NINA. I am alone. Once in a hundred years my lips are opened, my voice
echoes mournfully across the desert earth, and no one hears. And you,
poor lights of the marsh, you do not hear me. You are engendered at
sunset in the putrid mud, and flit wavering about the lake till dawn,
unconscious, unreasoning, unwarmed by the breath of life. Satan, father
of eternal matter, trembling lest the spark of life should glow in you,
has ordered an unceasing movement of the atoms that compose you, and so
you shift and change for ever. I, the spirit of the universe, I alone
am immutable and eternal. [A pause] Like a captive in a dungeon deep and
void, I know not where I am, nor what awaits me. One thing only is not
hidden from me: in my fierce and obstinate battle with Satan, the source
of the forces of matter, I am destined to be victorious in the end.
Matter and spirit will then be one at last in glorious harmony, and the
reign of freedom will begin on earth. But this can only come to pass by
slow degrees, when after countless eons the moon and earth and shining
Sirius himself shall fall to dust. Until that hour, oh, horror! horror!
horror! [A pause. Two glowing red points are seen shining across the
lake] Satan, my mighty foe, advances; I see his dread and lurid eyes.

ARKADINA. I smell sulphur. Is that done on purpose?

TREPLIEFF. Yes.

ARKADINA. Oh, I see; that is part of the effect.

TREPLIEFF. Mother!

NINA. He longs for man--

PAULINA. [To DORN] You have taken off your hat again! Put it on, you
will catch cold.

ARKADINA. The doctor has taken off his hat to Satan father of eternal
matter--

TREPLIEFF. [Loudly and angrily] Enough of this! There’s an end to the
performance. Down with the curtain!

ARKADINA. Why, what are you so angry about?

TREPLIEFF. [Stamping his foot] The curtain; down with it! [The curtain
falls] Excuse me, I forgot that only a chosen few might write plays or
act them. I have infringed the monopoly. I--I---

He would like to say more, but waves his hand instead, and goes out to
the left.

ARKADINA. What is the matter with him?

SORIN. You should not handle youthful egoism so roughly, sister.

ARKADINA. What did I say to him?

SORIN. You hurt his feelings.

ARKADINA. But he told me himself that this was all in fun, so I treated
his play as if it were a comedy.

SORIN. Nevertheless---

ARKADINA. Now it appears that he has produced a masterpiece, if you
please! I suppose it was not meant to amuse us at all, but that he
arranged the performance and fumigated us with sulphur to demonstrate to
us how plays should be written, and what is worth acting. I am tired
of him. No one could stand his constant thrusts and sallies. He is a
wilful, egotistic boy.

SORIN. He had hoped to give you pleasure.

ARKADINA. Is that so? I notice, though, that he did not choose an
ordinary play, but forced his decadent trash on us. I am willing to
listen to any raving, so long as it is not meant seriously, but in
showing us this, he pretended to be introducing us to a new form of art,
and inaugurating a new era. In my opinion, there was nothing new about
it, it was simply an exhibition of bad temper.

TRIGORIN. Everybody must write as he feels, and as best he may.

ARKADINA. Let him write as he feels and can, but let him spare me his
nonsense.

DORN. Thou art angry, O Jove!

ARKADINA. I am a woman, not Jove. [She lights a cigarette] And I am not
angry, I am only sorry to see a young man foolishly wasting his time. I
did not mean to hurt him.

MEDVIEDENKO. No one has any ground for separating life from matter, as
the spirit may well consist of the union of material atoms. [Excitedly,
to TRIGORIN] Some day you should write a play, and put on the stage the
life of a schoolmaster. It is a hard, hard life.

ARKADINA. I agree with you, but do not let us talk about plays or atoms
now. This is such a lovely evening. Listen to the singing, friends, how
sweet it sounds.

PAULINA. Yes, they are singing across the water. [A pause.]

ARKADINA. [To TRIGORIN] Sit down beside me here. Ten or fifteen years
ago we had music and singing on this lake almost all night. There are
six houses on its shores. All was noise and laughter and romance then,
such romance! The young star and idol of them all in those days was this
man here, [Nods toward DORN] Doctor Eugene Dorn. He is fascinating now,
but he was irresistible then. But my conscience is beginning to
prick me. Why did I hurt my poor boy? I am uneasy about him. [Loudly]
Constantine! Constantine!

MASHA. Shall I go and find him?

ARKADINA. If you please, my dear.

MASHA. [Goes off to the left, calling] Mr. Constantine! Oh, Mr.
Constantine!

NINA. [Comes in from behind the stage] I see that the play will never be
finished, so now I can go home. Good evening. [She kisses ARKADINA and
PAULINA.]

SORIN. Bravo! Bravo!

ARKADINA. Bravo! Bravo! We were quite charmed by your acting. With your
looks and such a lovely voice it is a crime for you to hide yourself
in the country. You must be very talented. It is your duty to go on the
stage, do you hear me?

NINA. It is the dream of my life, which will never come true.

ARKADINA. Who knows? Perhaps it will. But let me present Monsieur Boris
Trigorin.

NINA. I am delighted to meet you. [Embarrassed] I have read all your
books.

ARKADINA. [Drawing NINA down beside her] Don’t be afraid of him, dear.
He is a simple, good-natured soul, even if he is a celebrity. See, he is
embarrassed himself.

DORN. Couldn’t the curtain be raised now? It is depressing to have it
down.

SHAMRAEFF. [Loudly] Jacob, my man! Raise the curtain!

NINA. [To TRIGORIN] It was a curious play, wasn’t it?

TRIGORIN. Very. I couldn’t understand it at all, but I watched it with
the greatest pleasure because you acted with such sincerity, and the
setting was beautiful. [A pause] There must be a lot of fish in this
lake.

NINA. Yes, there are.

TRIGORIN. I love fishing. I know of nothing pleasanter than to sit on a
lake shore in the evening with one’s eyes on a floating cork.

NINA. Why, I should think that for one who has tasted the joys of
creation, no other pleasure could exist.

ARKADINA. Don’t talk like that. He always begins to flounder when people
say nice things to him.

SHAMRAEFF. I remember when the famous Silva was singing once in the
Opera House at Moscow, how delighted we all were when he took the low C.
Well, you can imagine our astonishment when one of the church cantors,
who happened to be sitting in the gallery, suddenly boomed out: “Bravo,
Silva!” a whole octave lower. Like this: [In a deep bass voice] “Bravo,
Silva!” The audience was left breathless. [A pause.]

DORN. An angel of silence is flying over our heads.

NINA. I must go. Good-bye.

ARKADINA. Where to? Where must you go so early? We shan’t allow it.

NINA. My father is waiting for me.

ARKADINA. How cruel he is, really. [They kiss each other] Then I suppose
we can’t keep you, but it is very hard indeed to let you go.

NINA. If you only knew how hard it is for me to leave you all.

ARKADINA. Somebody must see you home, my pet.

NINA. [Startled] No, no!

SORIN. [Imploringly] Don’t go!

NINA. I must.

SORIN. Stay just one hour more, and all. Come now, really, you know.

NINA. [Struggling against her desire to stay; through her tears] No, no,
I can’t. [She shakes hands with him and quickly goes out.]

ARKADINA. An unlucky girl! They say that her mother left the whole of an
immense fortune to her husband, and now the child is penniless because
the father has already willed everything away to his second wife. It is
pitiful.

DORN. Yes, her papa is a perfect beast, and I don’t mind saying so--it
is what he deserves.

SORIN. [Rubbing his chilled hands] Come, let us go in; the night is
damp, and my legs are aching.

ARKADINA. Yes, you act as if they were turned to stone; you can hardly
move them. Come, you unfortunate old man. [She takes his arm.]

SHAMRAEFF. [Offering his arm to his wife] Permit me, madame.

SORIN. I hear that dog howling again. Won’t you please have it
unchained, Shamraeff?

SHAMRAEFF. No, I really can’t, sir. The granary is full of millet, and
I am afraid thieves might break in if the dog were not there. [Walking
beside MEDVIEDENKO] Yes, a whole octave lower: “Bravo, Silva!” and he
wasn’t a singer either, just a simple church cantor.

MEDVIEDENKO. What salary does the church pay its singers? [All go out
except DORN.]

DORN. I may have lost my judgment and my wits, but I must confess I
liked that play. There was something in it. When the girl spoke of her
solitude and the Devil’s eyes gleamed across the lake, I felt my hands
shaking with excitement. It was so fresh and naive. But here he comes;
let me say something pleasant to him.

TREPLIEFF comes in.

TREPLIEFF. All gone already?

DORN. I am here.

TREPLIEFF. Masha has been yelling for me all over the park. An
insufferable creature.

DORN. Constantine, your play delighted me. It was strange, of course,
and I did not hear the end, but it made a deep impression on me. You
have a great deal of talent, and must persevere in your work.

TREPLIEFF seizes his hand and squeezes it hard, then kisses him
impetuously.

DORN. Tut, tut! how excited you are. Your eyes are full of tears. Listen
to me. You chose your subject in the realm of abstract thought, and you
did quite right. A work of art should invariably embody some lofty idea.
Only that which is seriously meant can ever be beautiful. How pale you
are!

TREPLIEFF. So you advise me to persevere?

DORN. Yes, but use your talent to express only deep and eternal truths.
I have led a quiet life, as you know, and am a contented man, but if I
should ever experience the exaltation that an artist feels during his
moments of creation, I think I should spurn this material envelope of my
soul and everything connected with it, and should soar away into heights
above this earth.

TREPLIEFF. I beg your pardon, but where is Nina?

DORN. And yet another thing: every work of art should have a definite
object in view. You should know why you are writing, for if you follow
the road of art without a goal before your eyes, you will lose yourself,
and your genius will be your ruin.

TREPLIEFF. [Impetuously] Where is Nina?

DORN. She has gone home.

TREPLIEFF. [In despair] Gone home? What shall I do? I want to see her; I
must see her! I shall follow her.

DORN. My dear boy, keep quiet.

TREPLIEFF. I am going. I must go.

MASHA comes in.

MASHA. Your mother wants you to come in, Mr. Constantine. She is waiting
for you, and is very uneasy.

TREPLIEFF. Tell her I have gone away. And for heaven’s sake, all of you,
leave me alone! Go away! Don’t follow me about!

DORN. Come, come, old chap, don’t act like this; it isn’t kind at all.

TREPLIEFF. [Through his tears] Good-bye, doctor, and thank you.

TREPLIEFF goes out.

DORN. [Sighing] Ah, youth, youth!

MASHA. It is always “Youth, youth,” when there is nothing else to be
said.

She takes snuff. DORN takes the snuff-box out of her hands and flings it
into the bushes.

DORN. Don’t do that, it is horrid. [A pause] I hear music in the house.
I must go in.

MASHA. Wait a moment.

DORN. What do you want?

MASHA. Let me tell you again. I feel like talking. [She grows more and
more excited] I do not love my father, but my heart turns to you. For
some reason, I feel with all my soul that you are near to me. Help me!
Help me, or I shall do something foolish and mock at my life, and ruin
it. I am at the end of my strength.

DORN. What is the matter? How can I help you?

MASHA. I am in agony. No one, no one can imagine how I suffer. [She lays
her head on his shoulder and speaks softly] I love Constantine.

DORN. Oh, how excitable you all are! And how much love there is about
this lake of spells! [Tenderly] But what can I do for you, my child?
What? What?

The curtain falls.




ACT II

_The lawn in front of SORIN’S house. The house stands in the background,
on a broad terrace. The lake, brightly reflecting the rays of the sun,
lies to the left. There are flower-beds here and there. It is noon;
the day is hot. ARKADINA, DORN, and MASHA are sitting on a bench on the
lawn, in the shade of an old linden. An open book is lying on DORN’S
knees_.

ARKADINA. [To MASHA] Come, get up. [They both get up] Stand beside me.
You are twenty-two and I am almost twice your age. Tell me, Doctor,
which of us is the younger looking?

DORN. You are, of course.

ARKADINA. You see! Now why is it? Because I work; my heart and mind are
always busy, whereas you never move off the same spot. You don’t live.
It is a maxim of mine never to look into the future. I never admit the
thought of old age or death, and just accept what comes to me.

MASHA. I feel as if I had been in the world a thousand years, and I
trail my life behind me like an endless scarf. Often I have no desire
to live at all. Of course that is foolish. One ought to pull oneself
together and shake off such nonsense.

DORN. [Sings softly]

“Tell her, oh flowers--”

ARKADINA. And then I keep myself as correct-looking as an Englishman. I
am always well-groomed, as the saying is, and carefully dressed, with my
hair neatly arranged. Do you think I should ever permit myself to leave
the house half-dressed, with untidy hair? Certainly not! I have kept my
looks by never letting myself slump as some women do. [She puts her arms
akimbo, and walks up and down on the lawn] See me, tripping on tiptoe
like a fifteen-year-old girl.

DORN. I see. Nevertheless, I shall continue my reading. [He takes up his
book] Let me see, we had come to the grain-dealer and the rats.

ARKADINA. And the rats. Go on. [She sits down] No, give me the book, it
is my turn to read. [She takes the book and looks for the place] And
the rats. Ah, here it is. [She reads] “It is as dangerous for society to
attract and indulge authors as it is for grain-dealers to raise rats
in their granaries. Yet society loves authors. And so, when a woman
has found one whom she wishes to make her own, she lays siege to him
by indulging and flattering him.” That may be so in France, but it
certainly is not so in Russia. We do not carry out a programme like
that. With us, a woman is usually head over ears in love with an author
before she attempts to lay siege to him. You have an example before your
eyes, in me and Trigorin.

SORIN comes in leaning on a cane, with NINA beside him. MEDVIEDENKO
follows, pushing an arm-chair.

SORIN. [In a caressing voice, as if speaking to a child] So we are happy
now, eh? We are enjoying ourselves to-day, are we? Father and stepmother
have gone away to Tver, and we are free for three whole days!

NINA. [Sits down beside ARKADINA, and embraces her] I am so happy. I
belong to you now.

SORIN. [Sits down in his arm-chair] She looks lovely to-day.

ARKADINA. Yes, she has put on her prettiest dress, and looks sweet. That
was nice of you. [She kisses NINA] But we mustn’t praise her too much;
we shall spoil her. Where is Trigorin?

NINA. He is fishing off the wharf.

ARKADINA. I wonder he isn’t bored. [She begins to read again.]

NINA. What are you reading?

ARKADINA. “On the Water,” by Maupassant. [She reads a few lines to
herself] But the rest is neither true nor interesting. [She lays down
the book] I am uneasy about my son. Tell me, what is the matter with
him? Why is he so dull and depressed lately? He spends all his days on
the lake, and I scarcely ever see him any more.

MASHA. His heart is heavy. [Timidly, to NINA] Please recite something
from his play.

NINA. [Shrugging her shoulders] Shall I? Is it so interesting?

MASHA. [With suppressed rapture] When he recites, his eyes shine and his
face grows pale. His voice is beautiful and sad, and he has the ways of
a poet.

SORIN begins to snore.

DORN. Pleasant dreams!

ARKADINA. Peter!

SORIN. Eh?

ARKADINA. Are you asleep?

SORIN. Not a bit of it. [A pause.]

ARKADINA. You don’t do a thing for your health, brother, but you really
ought to.

DORN. The idea of doing anything for one’s health at sixty-five!

SORIN. One still wants to live at sixty-five.

DORN. [Crossly] Ho! Take some camomile tea.

ARKADINA. I think a journey to some watering-place would be good for
him.

DORN. Why, yes; he might go as well as not.

ARKADINA. You don’t understand.

DORN. There is nothing to understand in this case; it is quite clear.

MEDVIEDENKO. He ought to give up smoking.

SORIN. What nonsense! [A pause.]

DORN. No, that is not nonsense. Wine and tobacco destroy the
individuality. After a cigar or a glass of vodka you are no longer Peter
Sorin, but Peter Sorin plus somebody else. Your ego breaks in two: you
begin to think of yourself in the third person.

SORIN. It is easy for you to condemn smoking and drinking; you have
known what life is, but what about me? I have served in the Department
of Justice for twenty-eight years, but I have never lived, I have never
had any experiences. You are satiated with life, and that is why you
have an inclination for philosophy, but I want to live, and that is why
I drink my wine for dinner and smoke cigars, and all.

DORN. One must take life seriously, and to take a cure at sixty-five
and regret that one did not have more pleasure in youth is, forgive my
saying so, trifling.

MASHA. It must be lunch-time. [She walks away languidly, with a dragging
step] My foot has gone to sleep.

DORN. She is going to have a couple of drinks before lunch.

SORIN. The poor soul is unhappy.

DORN. That is a trifle, your honour.

SORIN. You judge her like a man who has obtained all he wants in life.

ARKADINA. Oh, what could be duller than this dear tedium of the country?
The air is hot and still, nobody does anything but sit and philosophise
about life. It is pleasant, my friends, to sit and listen to you here,
but I had rather a thousand times sit alone in the room of a hotel
learning a role by heart.

NINA. [With enthusiasm] You are quite right. I understand how you feel.

SORIN. Of course it is pleasanter to live in town. One can sit in one’s
library with a telephone at one’s elbow, no one comes in without being
first announced by the footman, the streets are full of cabs, and all---

DORN. [Sings]

“Tell her, oh flowers---”

SHAMRAEFF comes in, followed by PAULINA.

SHAMRAEFF. Here they are. How do you do? [He kisses ARKADINA’S hand and
then NINA’S] I am delighted to see you looking so well. [To ARKADINA] My
wife tells me that you mean to go to town with her to-day. Is that so?

ARKADINA. Yes, that is what I had planned to do.

SHAMRAEFF. Hm--that is splendid, but how do you intend to get there,
madam? We are hauling rye to-day, and all the men are busy. What horses
would you take?

ARKADINA. What horses? How do I know what horses we shall have?

SORIN. Why, we have the carriage horses.

SHAMRAEFF. The carriage horses! And where am I to find the harness for
them? This is astonishing! My dear madam, I have the greatest respect
for your talents, and would gladly sacrifice ten years of my life for
you, but I cannot let you have any horses to-day.

ARKADINA. But if I must go to town? What an extraordinary state of
affairs!

SHAMRAEFF. You do not know, madam, what it is to run a farm.

ARKADINA. [In a burst of anger] That is an old story! Under these
circumstances I shall go back to Moscow this very day. Order a carriage
for me from the village, or I shall go to the station on foot.

SHAMRAEFF. [losing his temper] Under these circumstances I resign my
position. You must find yourself another manager. [He goes out.]

ARKADINA. It is like this every summer: every summer I am insulted here.
I shall never set foot here again.

She goes out to the left, in the direction of the wharf. In a few
minutes she is seen entering the house, followed by TRIGORIN, who
carries a bucket and fishing-rod.

SORIN. [Losing his temper] What the deuce did he mean by his impudence?
I want all the horses brought here at once!

NINA. [To PAULINA] How could he refuse anything to Madame Arkadina, the
famous actress? Is not every wish, every caprice even, of hers, more
important than any farm work? This is incredible.

PAULINA. [In despair] What can I do about it? Put yourself in my place
and tell me what I can do.

SORIN. [To NINA] Let us go and find my sister, and all beg her not to
go. [He looks in the direction in which SHAMRAEFF went out] That man is
insufferable; a regular tyrant.

NINA. [Preventing him from getting up] Sit still, sit still, and let
us wheel you. [She and MEDVIEDENKO push the chair before them] This is
terrible!

SORIN. Yes, yes, it is terrible; but he won’t leave. I shall have a talk
with him in a moment. [They go out. Only DORN and PAULINA are left.]

DORN. How tiresome people are! Your husband deserves to be thrown out of
here neck and crop, but it will all end by this old granny Sorin and his
sister asking the man’s pardon. See if it doesn’t.

PAULINA. He has sent the carriage horses into the fields too. These
misunderstandings occur every day. If you only knew how they excite me!
I am ill; see! I am trembling all over! I cannot endure his rough ways.
[Imploringly] Eugene, my darling, my beloved, take me to you. Our time
is short; we are no longer young; let us end deception and concealment,
even though it is only at the end of our lives. [A pause.]

DORN. I am fifty-five years old. It is too late now for me to change my
ways of living.

PAULINA. I know that you refuse me because there are other women who are
near to you, and you cannot take everybody. I understand. Excuse me--I
see I am only bothering you.

NINA is seen near the house picking a bunch of flowers.

DORN. No, it is all right.

PAULINA. I am tortured by jealousy. Of course you are a doctor and
cannot escape from women. I understand.

DORN. [TO NINA, who comes toward him] How are things in there?

NINA. Madame Arkadina is crying, and Sorin is having an attack of
asthma.

DORN. Let us go and give them both some camomile tea.

NINA. [Hands him the bunch of flowers] Here are some flowers for you.

DORN. Thank you. [He goes into the house.]

PAULINA. [Following him] What pretty flowers! [As they reach the house
she says in a low voice] Give me those flowers! Give them to me!

DORN hands her the flowers; she tears them to pieces and flings them
away. They both go into the house.

NINA. [Alone] How strange to see a famous actress weeping, and for
such a trifle! Is it not strange, too, that a famous author should sit
fishing all day? He is the idol of the public, the papers are full
of him, his photograph is for sale everywhere, his works have been
translated into many foreign languages, and yet he is overjoyed if he
catches a couple of minnows. I always thought famous people were distant
and proud; I thought they despised the common crowd which exalts
riches and birth, and avenged themselves on it by dazzling it with the
inextinguishable honour and glory of their fame. But here I see them
weeping and playing cards and flying into passions like everybody else.

TREPLIEFF comes in without a hat on, carrying a gun and a dead seagull.

TREPLIEFF. Are you alone here?

NINA. Yes.

TREPLIEFF lays the sea-gull at her feet.

NINA. What do you mean by this?

TREPLIEFF. I was base enough to-day to kill this gull. I lay it at your
feet.

NINA. What is happening to you? [She picks up the gull and stands
looking at it.]

TREPLIEFF. [After a pause] So shall I soon end my own life.

NINA. You have changed so that I fail to recognise you.

TREPLIEFF. Yes, I have changed since the time when I ceased to recognise
you. You have failed me; your look is cold; you do not like to have me
near you.

NINA. You have grown so irritable lately, and you talk so darkly and
symbolically that you must forgive me if I fail to follow you. I am too
simple to understand you.

TREPLIEFF. All this began when my play failed so dismally. A woman never
can forgive failure. I have burnt the manuscript to the last page. Oh,
if you could only fathom my unhappiness! Your estrangement is to me
terrible, incredible; it is as if I had suddenly waked to find this
lake dried up and sunk into the earth. You say you are too simple to
understand me; but, oh, what is there to understand? You disliked
my play, you have no faith in my powers, you already think of me as
commonplace and worthless, as many are. [Stamping his foot] How well
I can understand your feelings! And that understanding is to me like
a dagger in the brain. May it be accursed, together with my stupidity,
which sucks my life-blood like a snake! [He sees TRIGORIN, who
approaches reading a book] There comes real genius, striding along like
another Hamlet, and with a book, too. [Mockingly] “Words, words, words.”
 You feel the warmth of that sun already, you smile, your eyes melt and
glow liquid in its rays. I shall not disturb you. [He goes out.]

TRIGORIN. [Making notes in his book] Takes snuff and drinks vodka;
always wears black dresses; is loved by a schoolteacher--

NINA. How do you do?

TRIGORIN. How are you, Miss Nina? Owing to an unforeseen development of
circumstances, it seems that we are leaving here today. You and I shall
probably never see each other again, and I am sorry for it. I seldom
meet a young and pretty girl now; I can hardly remember how it feels
to be nineteen, and the young girls in my books are seldom living
characters. I should like to change places with you, if but for an hour,
to look out at the world through your eyes, and so find out what sort of
a little person you are.

NINA. And I should like to change places with you.

TRIGORIN. Why?

NINA. To find out how a famous genius feels. What is it like to be
famous? What sensations does it give you?

TRIGORIN. What sensations? I don’t believe it gives any. [Thoughtfully]
Either you exaggerate my fame, or else, if it exists, all I can say is
that one simply doesn’t feel fame in any way.

NINA. But when you read about yourself in the papers?

TRIGORIN. If the critics praise me, I am happy; if they condemn me, I am
out of sorts for the next two days.

NINA. This is a wonderful world. If you only knew how I envy you! Men
are born to different destinies. Some dully drag a weary, useless life
behind them, lost in the crowd, unhappy, while to one out of a million,
as to you, for instance, comes a bright destiny full of interest and
meaning. You are lucky.

TRIGORIN. I, lucky? [He shrugs his shoulders] H-m--I hear you talking
about fame, and happiness, and bright destinies, and those fine words of
yours mean as much to me--forgive my saying so--as sweetmeats do, which
I never eat. You are very young, and very kind.

NINA. Your life is beautiful.

TRIGORIN. I see nothing especially lovely about it. [He looks at his
watch] Excuse me, I must go at once, and begin writing again. I am in a
hurry. [He laughs] You have stepped on my pet corn, as they say, and I
am getting excited, and a little cross. Let us discuss this bright and
beautiful life of mine, though. [After a few moments’ thought] Violent
obsessions sometimes lay hold of a man: he may, for instance, think day
and night of nothing but the moon. I have such a moon. Day and night I
am held in the grip of one besetting thought, to write, write, write!
Hardly have I finished one book than something urges me to write
another, and then a third, and then a fourth--I write ceaselessly. I am,
as it were, on a treadmill. I hurry for ever from one story to another,
and can’t help myself. Do you see anything bright and beautiful in that?
Oh, it is a wild life! Even now, thrilled as I am by talking to you, I
do not forget for an instant that an unfinished story is awaiting me. My
eye falls on that cloud there, which has the shape of a grand piano; I
instantly make a mental note that I must remember to mention in my story
a cloud floating by that looked like a grand piano. I smell heliotrope;
I mutter to myself: a sickly smell, the colour worn by widows; I must
remember that in writing my next description of a summer evening. I
catch an idea in every sentence of yours or of my own, and hasten to
lock all these treasures in my literary store-room, thinking that some
day they may be useful to me. As soon as I stop working I rush off to
the theatre or go fishing, in the hope that I may find oblivion there,
but no! Some new subject for a story is sure to come rolling through my
brain like an iron cannonball. I hear my desk calling, and have to go
back to it and begin to write, write, write, once more. And so it
goes for everlasting. I cannot escape myself, though I feel that I am
consuming my life. To prepare the honey I feed to unknown crowds, I am
doomed to brush the bloom from my dearest flowers, to tear them from
their stems, and trample the roots that bore them under foot. Am I not
a madman? Should I not be treated by those who know me as one mentally
diseased? Yet it is always the same, same old story, till I begin to
think that all this praise and admiration must be a deception, that I am
being hoodwinked because they know I am crazy, and I sometimes tremble
lest I should be grabbed from behind and whisked off to a lunatic
asylum. The best years of my youth were made one continual agony for me
by my writing. A young author, especially if at first he does not make
a success, feels clumsy, ill-at-ease, and superfluous in the world. His
nerves are all on edge and stretched to the point of breaking; he is
irresistibly attracted to literary and artistic people, and hovers about
them unknown and unnoticed, fearing to look them bravely in the eye,
like a man with a passion for gambling, whose money is all gone. I
did not know my readers, but for some reason I imagined they were
distrustful and unfriendly; I was mortally afraid of the public, and
when my first play appeared, it seemed to me as if all the dark eyes in
the audience were looking at it with enmity, and all the blue ones with
cold indifference. Oh, how terrible it was! What agony!

NINA. But don’t your inspiration and the act of creation give you
moments of lofty happiness?

TRIGORIN. Yes. Writing is a pleasure to me, and so is reading the
proofs, but no sooner does a book leave the press than it becomes odious
to me; it is not what I meant it to be; I made a mistake to write it at
all; I am provoked and discouraged. Then the public reads it and says:
“Yes, it is clever and pretty, but not nearly as good as Tolstoi,” or
“It is a lovely thing, but not as good as Turgenieff’s ‘Fathers and
Sons,’” and so it will always be. To my dying day I shall hear people
say: “Clever and pretty; clever and pretty,” and nothing more; and when
I am gone, those that knew me will say as they pass my grave: “Here lies
Trigorin, a clever writer, but he was not as good as Turgenieff.”

NINA. You must excuse me, but I decline to understand what you are
talking about. The fact is, you have been spoilt by your success.

TRIGORIN. What success have I had? I have never pleased myself; as
a writer, I do not like myself at all. The trouble is that I am made
giddy, as it were, by the fumes of my brain, and often hardly know what
I am writing. I love this lake, these trees, the blue heaven; nature’s
voice speaks to me and wakes a feeling of passion in my heart, and I
am overcome by an uncontrollable desire to write. But I am not only
a painter of landscapes, I am a man of the city besides. I love my
country, too, and her people; I feel that, as a writer, it is my duty to
speak of their sorrows, of their future, also of science, of the rights
of man, and so forth. So I write on every subject, and the public hounds
me on all sides, sometimes in anger, and I race and dodge like a fox
with a pack of hounds on his trail. I see life and knowledge flitting
away before me. I am left behind them like a peasant who has missed his
train at a station, and finally I come back to the conclusion that all
I am fit for is to describe landscapes, and that whatever else I attempt
rings abominably false.

NINA. You work too hard to realise the importance of your writings. What
if you are discontented with yourself? To others you appear a great and
splendid man. If I were a writer like you I should devote my whole life
to the service of the Russian people, knowing at the same time that
their welfare depended on their power to rise to the heights I had
attained, and the people should send me before them in a chariot of
triumph.

TRIGORIN. In a chariot? Do you think I am Agamemnon? [They both smile.]

NINA. For the bliss of being a writer or an actress I could endure want,
and disillusionment, and the hatred of my friends, and the pangs of my
own dissatisfaction with myself; but I should demand in return fame,
real, resounding fame! [She covers her face with her hands] Whew! My
head reels!

THE VOICE OF ARKADINA. [From inside the house] Boris! Boris!

TRIGORIN. She is calling me, probably to come and pack, but I don’t want
to leave this place. [His eyes rest on the lake] What a blessing such
beauty is!

NINA. Do you see that house there, on the far shore?

TRIGORIN. Yes.

NINA. That was my dead mother’s home. I was born there, and have lived
all my life beside this lake. I know every little island in it.

TRIGORIN. This is a beautiful place to live. [He catches sight of the
dead sea-gull] What is that?

NINA. A gull. Constantine shot it.

TRIGORIN. What a lovely bird! Really, I can’t bear to go away. Can’t you
persuade Irina to stay? [He writes something in his note-book.]

NINA. What are you writing?

TRIGORIN. Nothing much, only an idea that occurred to me. [He puts the
book back in his pocket] An idea for a short story. A young girl grows
up on the shores of a lake, as you have. She loves the lake as the gulls
do, and is as happy and free as they. But a man sees her who chances to
come that way, and he destroys her out of idleness, as this gull here
has been destroyed. [A pause. ARKADINA appears at one of the windows.]

ARKADINA. Boris! Where are you?

TRIGORIN. I am coming this minute.

He goes toward the house, looking back at NINA. ARKADINA remains at the
window.

TRIGORIN. What do you want?

ARKADINA. We are not going away, after all.

TRIGORIN goes into the house. NINA comes forward and stands lost in
thought.

NINA. It is a dream!

The curtain falls.




ACT III

_The dining-room of SORIN’S house. Doors open out of it to the right
and left. A table stands in the centre of the room. Trunks and boxes
encumber the floor, and preparations for departure are evident. TRIGORIN
is sitting at a table eating his breakfast, and MASHA is standing beside
him_.

MASHA. I am telling you all these things because you write books and
they may be useful to you. I tell you honestly, I should not have lived
another day if he had wounded himself fatally. Yet I am courageous; I
have decided to tear this love of mine out of my heart by the roots.

TRIGORIN. How will you do it?

MASHA. By marrying Medviedenko.

TRIGORIN. The school-teacher?

MASHA. Yes.

TRIGORIN. I don’t see the necessity for that.

MASHA. Oh, if you knew what it is to love without hope for years and
years, to wait for ever for something that will never come! I shall not
marry for love, but marriage will at least be a change, and will bring
new cares to deaden the memories of the past. Shall we have another
drink?

TRIGORIN. Haven’t you had enough?

MASHA. Fiddlesticks! [She fills a glass] Don’t look at me with that
expression on your face. Women drink oftener than you imagine, but most
of them do it in secret, and not openly, as I do. They do indeed, and
it is always either vodka or brandy. [They touch glasses] To your good
health! You are so easy to get on with that I am sorry to see you go.
[They drink.]

TRIGORIN. And I am sorry to leave.

MASHA. You should ask her to stay.

TRIGORIN. She would not do that now. Her son has been behaving
outrageously. First he attempted suicide, and now I hear he is going
to challenge me to a duel, though what his provocation may be I can’t
imagine. He is always sulking and sneering and preaching about a new
form of art, as if the field of art were not large enough to accommodate
both old and new without the necessity of jostling.

MASHA. It is jealousy. However, that is none of my business. [A pause.
JACOB walks through the room carrying a trunk; NINA comes in and stands
by the window] That schoolteacher of mine is none too clever, but he
is very good, poor man, and he loves me dearly, and I am sorry for him.
However, let me say good-bye and wish you a pleasant journey. Remember
me kindly in your thoughts. [She shakes hands with him] Thanks for your
goodwill. Send me your books, and be sure to write something in them;
nothing formal, but simply this: “To Masha, who, forgetful of her
origin, for some unknown reason is living in this world.” Good-bye. [She
goes out.]

NINA. [Holding out her closed hand to TRIGORIN] Is it odd or even?

TRIGORIN. Even.

NINA. [With a sigh] No, it is odd. I had only one pea in my hand. I
wanted to see whether I was to become an actress or not. If only some
one would advise me what to do!

TRIGORIN. One cannot give advice in a case like this. [A pause.]

NINA. We shall soon part, perhaps never to meet again. I should like you
to accept this little medallion as a remembrance of me. I have had your
initials engraved on it, and on this side is the name of one of your
books: “Days and Nights.”

TRIGORIN. How sweet of you! [He kisses the medallion] It is a lovely
present.

NINA. Think of me sometimes.

TRIGORIN. I shall never forget you. I shall always remember you as I saw
you that bright day--do you recall it?--a week ago, when you wore your
light dress, and we talked together, and the white seagull lay on the
bench beside us.

NINA. [Lost in thought] Yes, the sea-gull. [A pause] I beg you to let me
see you alone for two minutes before you go.

She goes out to the left. At the same moment ARKADINA comes in from the
right, followed by SORIN in a long coat, with his orders on his breast,
and by JACOB, who is busy packing.

ARKADINA. Stay here at home, you poor old man. How could you pay visits
with that rheumatism of yours? [To TRIGORIN] Who left the room just now,
was it Nina?

TRIGORIN. Yes.

ARKADINA. I beg your pardon; I am afraid we interrupted you. [She sits
down] I think everything is packed. I am absolutely exhausted.

TRIGORIN. [Reading the inscription on the medallion] “Days and Nights,
page 121, lines 11 and 12.”

JACOB. [Clearing the table] Shall I pack your fishing-rods, too, sir?

TRIGORIN. Yes, I shall need them, but you can give my books away.

JACOB. Very well, sir.

TRIGORIN. [To himself] Page 121, lines 11 and 12. [To ARKADINA] Have we
my books here in the house?

ARKADINA. Yes, they are in my brother’s library, in the corner cupboard.

TRIGORIN. Page 121--[He goes out.]

SORIN. You are going away, and I shall be lonely without you.

ARKADINA. What would you do in town?

SORIN. Oh, nothing in particular, but somehow--[He laughs] They are soon
to lay the corner-stone of the new court-house here. How I should like
to leap out of this minnow-pond, if but for an hour or two! I am tired
of lying here like an old cigarette stump. I have ordered the carriage
for one o’clock. We can go away together.

ARKADINA. [After a pause] No, you must stay here. Don’t be lonely, and
don’t catch cold. Keep an eye on my boy. Take good care of him; guide
him along the proper paths. [A pause] I am going away, and so shall
never find out why Constantine shot himself, but I think the chief
reason was jealousy, and the sooner I take Trigorin away, the better.

SORIN. There were--how shall I explain it to you?--other reasons besides
jealousy for his act. Here is a clever young chap living in the depths
of the country, without money or position, with no future ahead of him,
and with nothing to do. He is ashamed and afraid of being so idle. I am
devoted to him and he is fond of me, but nevertheless he feels that he
is useless here, that he is little more than a dependent in this house.
It is the pride in him.

ARKADINA. He is a misery to me! [Thoughtfully] He might possibly enter
the army.

SORIN. [Gives a whistle, and then speaks with hesitation] It seems to
me that the best thing for him would be if you were to let him have
a little money. For one thing, he ought to be allowed to dress like a
human being. See how he looks! Wearing the same little old coat that
he has had for three years, and he doesn’t even possess an overcoat!
[Laughing] And it wouldn’t hurt the youngster to sow a few wild oats;
let him go abroad, say, for a time. It wouldn’t cost much.

ARKADINA. Yes, but--However, I think I might manage about his clothes,
but I couldn’t let him go abroad. And no, I don’t think I can let him
have his clothes even, now. [Decidedly] I have no money at present.

SORIN laughs.

ARKADINA. I haven’t indeed.

SORIN. [Whistles] Very well. Forgive me, darling; don’t be angry. You
are a noble, generous woman!

ARKADINA. [Weeping] I really haven’t the money.

SORIN. If I had any money of course I should let him have some myself,
but I haven’t even a penny. The farm manager takes my pension from me
and puts it all into the farm or into cattle or bees, and in that way it
is always lost for ever. The bees die, the cows die, they never let me
have a horse.

ARKADINA. Of course I have some money, but I am an actress and my
expenses for dress alone are enough to bankrupt me.

SORIN. You are a dear, and I am very fond of you, indeed I am. But
something is the matter with me again. [He staggers] I feel giddy. [He
leans against the table] I feel faint, and all.

ARKADINA. [Frightened ] Peter! [She tries to support him] Peter!
dearest! [She calls] Help! Help!

TREPLIEFF and MEDVIEDENKO come in; TREPLIEFF has a bandage around his
head.

ARKADINA. He is fainting!

SORIN. I am all right. [He smiles and drinks some water] It is all over
now.

TREPLIEFF. [To his mother] Don’t be frightened, mother, these attacks
are not dangerous; my uncle often has them now. [To his uncle] You must
go and lie down, Uncle.

SORIN. Yes, I think I shall, for a few minutes. I am going to Moscow
all the same, but I shall lie down a bit before I start. [He goes out
leaning on his cane.]

MEDVIEDENKO. [Giving him his arm] Do you know this riddle? On four legs
in the morning; on two legs at noon; and on three legs in the evening?

SORIN. [Laughing] Yes, exactly, and on one’s back at night. Thank you, I
can walk alone.

MEDVIEDENKO. Dear me, what formality! [He and SORIN go out.]

ARKADINA. He gave me a dreadful fright.

TREPLIEFF. It is not good for him to live in the country. Mother, if you
would only untie your purse-strings for once, and lend him a thousand
roubles! He could then spend a whole year in town.

ARKADINA. I have no money. I am an actress and not a banker. [A pause.]

TREPLIEFF. Please change my bandage for me, mother, you do it so gently.

ARKADINA goes to the cupboard and takes out a box of bandages and a
bottle of iodoform.

ARKADINA. The doctor is late.

TREPLIEFF. Yes, he promised to be here at nine, and now it is noon
already.

ARKADINA. Sit down. [She takes the bandage off his head] You look as if
you had a turban on. A stranger that was in the kitchen yesterday asked
to what nationality you belonged. Your wound is almost healed. [She
kisses his head] You won’t be up to any more of these silly tricks
again, will you, when I am gone?

TREPLIEFF. No, mother. I did that in a moment of insane despair, when I
had lost all control over myself. It will never happen again. [He kisses
her hand] Your touch is golden. I remember when you were still acting at
the State Theatre, long ago, when I was still a little chap, there was a
fight one day in our court, and a poor washerwoman was almost beaten to
death. She was picked up unconscious, and you nursed her till she was
well, and bathed her children in the washtubs. Have you forgotten it?

ARKADINA. Yes, entirely. [She puts on a new bandage.]

TREPLIEFF. Two ballet dancers lived in the same house, and they used to
come and drink coffee with you.

ARKADINA. I remember that.

TREPLIEFF. They were very pious. [A pause] I love you again, these last
few days, as tenderly and trustingly as I did as a child. I have no one
left me now but you. Why, why do you let yourself be controlled by that
man?

ARKADINA. You don’t understand him, Constantine. He has a wonderfully
noble personality.

TREPLIEFF. Nevertheless, when he has been told that I wish to challenge
him to a duel his nobility does not prevent him from playing the coward.
He is about to beat an ignominious retreat.

ARKADINA. What nonsense! I have asked him myself to go.

TREPLIEFF. A noble personality indeed! Here we are almost quarrelling
over him, and he is probably in the garden laughing at us at this very
moment, or else enlightening Nina’s mind and trying to persuade her into
thinking him a man of genius.

ARKADINA. You enjoy saying unpleasant things to me. I have the greatest
respect for that man, and I must ask you not to speak ill of him in my
presence.

TREPLIEFF. I have no respect for him at all. You want me to think him a
genius, as you do, but I refuse to lie: his books make me sick.

ARKADINA. You envy him. There is nothing left for people with no talent
and mighty pretensions to do but to criticise those who are really
gifted. I hope you enjoy the consolation it brings.

TREPLIEFF. [With irony] Those who are really gifted, indeed! [Angrily] I
am cleverer than any of you, if it comes to that! [He tears the bandage
off his head] You are the slaves of convention, you have seized the
upper hand and now lay down as law everything that you do; all else you
strangle and trample on. I refuse to accept your point of view, yours
and his, I refuse!

ARKADINA. That is the talk of a decadent.

TREPLIEFF. Go back to your beloved stage and act the miserable
ditch-water plays you so much admire!

ARKADINA. I never acted in a play like that in my life. You couldn’t
write even the trashiest music-hall farce, you idle good-for-nothing!

TREPLIEFF. Miser!

ARKADINA. Rag-bag!

TREPLIEFF sits down and begins to cry softly.

ARKADINA. [Walking up and down in great excitement] Don’t cry! You
mustn’t cry! [She bursts into tears] You really mustn’t. [She kisses his
forehead, his cheeks, his head] My darling child, forgive me. Forgive
your wicked mother.

TREPLIEFF. [Embracing her] Oh, if you could only know what it is to have
lost everything under heaven! She does not love me. I see I shall never
be able to write. Every hope has deserted me.

ARKADINA. Don’t despair. This will all pass. He is going away to-day,
and she will love you once more. [She wipes away his tears] Stop crying.
We have made peace again.

TREPLIEFF. [Kissing her hand] Yes, mother.

ARKADINA. [Tenderly] Make your peace with him, too. Don’t fight with
him. You surely won’t fight?

TREPLIEFF. I won’t, but you must not insist on my seeing him again,
mother, I couldn’t stand it. [TRIGORIN comes in] There he is; I am
going. [He quickly puts the medicines away in the cupboard] The doctor
will attend to my head.

TRIGORIN. [Looking through the pages of a book] Page 121, lines 11 and
12; here it is. [He reads] “If at any time you should have need of my
life, come and take it.”

TREPLIEFF picks up the bandage off the floor and goes out.

ARKADINA. [Looking at her watch] The carriage will soon be here.

TRIGORIN. [To himself] If at any time you should have need of my life,
come and take it.

ARKADINA. I hope your things are all packed.

TRIGORIN. [Impatiently] Yes, yes. [In deep thought] Why do I hear a note
of sadness that wrings my heart in this cry of a pure soul? If at any
time you should have need of my life, come and take it. [To ARKADINA]
Let us stay here one more day!

ARKADINA shakes her head.

TRIGORIN. Do let us stay!

ARKADINA. I know, dearest, what keeps you here, but you must control
yourself. Be sober; your emotions have intoxicated you a little.

TRIGORIN. You must be sober, too. Be sensible; look upon what has
happened as a true friend would. [Taking her hand] You are capable of
self-sacrifice. Be a friend to me and release me!

ARKADINA. [In deep excitement] Are you so much in love?

TRIGORIN. I am irresistibly impelled toward her. It may be that this is
just what I need.

ARKADINA. What, the love of a country girl? Oh, how little you know
yourself!

TRIGORIN. People sometimes walk in their sleep, and so I feel as if
I were asleep, and dreaming of her as I stand here talking to you. My
imagination is shaken by the sweetest and most glorious visions. Release
me!

ARKADINA. [Shuddering] No, no! I am only an ordinary woman; you must not
say such things to me. Do not torment me, Boris; you frighten me.

TRIGORIN. You could be an extraordinary woman if you only would. Love
alone can bring happiness on earth, love the enchanting, the poetical
love of youth, that sweeps away the sorrows of the world. I had no time
for it when I was young and struggling with want and laying siege to the
literary fortress, but now at last this love has come to me. I see it
beckoning; why should I fly?

ARKADINA. [With anger] You are mad!

TRIGORIN. Release me.

ARKADINA. You have all conspired together to torture me to-day. [She
weeps.]

TRIGORIN. [Clutching his head desperately] She doesn’t understand me!
She won’t understand me!

ARKADINA. Am I then so old and ugly already that you can talk to me like
this without any shame about another woman? [She embraces and kisses
him] Oh, you have lost your senses! My splendid, my glorious friend, my
love for you is the last chapter of my life. [She falls on her knees]
You are my pride, my joy, my light. [She embraces his knees] I could
never endure it should you desert me, if only for an hour; I should go
mad. Oh, my wonder, my marvel, my king!

TRIGORIN. Some one might come in. [He helps her to rise.]

ARKADINA. Let them come! I am not ashamed of my love. [She kisses his
hands] My jewel! My despair! You want to do a foolish thing, but I don’t
want you to do it. I shan’t let you do it! [She laughs] You are mine,
you are mine! This forehead is mine, these eyes are mine, this silky
hair is mine. All your being is mine. You are so clever, so wise, the
first of all living writers; you are the only hope of your country. You
are so fresh, so simple, so deeply humourous. You can bring out every
feature of a man or of a landscape in a single line, and your characters
live and breathe. Do you think that these words are but the incense of
flattery? Do you think I am not speaking the truth? Come, look into my
eyes; look deep; do you find lies there? No, you see that I alone know
how to treasure you. I alone tell you the truth. Oh, my very dear, you
will go with me? You will? You will not forsake me?

TRIGORIN. I have no will of my own; I never had. I am too indolent, too
submissive, too phlegmatic, to have any. Is it possible that women like
that? Take me. Take me away with you, but do not let me stir a step from
your side.

ARKADINA. [To herself] Now he is mine! [Carelessly, as if nothing
unusual had happened] Of course you must stay here if you really want
to. I shall go, and you can follow in a week’s time. Yes, really, why
should you hurry away?

TRIGORIN. Let us go together.

ARKADINA. As you like. Let us go together then. [A pause. TRIGORIN
writes something in his note-book] What are you writing?

TRIGORIN. A happy expression I heard this morning: “A grove of maiden
pines.” It may be useful. [He yawns] So we are really off again,
condemned once more to railway carriages, to stations and restaurants,
to Hamburger steaks and endless arguments!

SHAMRAEFF comes in.

SHAMRAEFF. I am sorry to have to inform you that your carriage is at the
door. It is time to start, honoured madam, the train leaves at two-five.
Would you be kind enough, madam, to remember to inquire for me where
Suzdaltzeff the actor is now? Is he still alive, I wonder? Is he well?
He and I have had many a jolly time together. He was inimitable in “The
Stolen Mail.” A tragedian called Izmailoff was in the same company, I
remember, who was also quite remarkable. Don’t hurry, madam, you still
have five minutes. They were both of them conspirators once, in the
same melodrama, and one night when in the course of the play they were
suddenly discovered, instead of saying “We have been trapped!” Izmailoff
cried out: “We have been rapped!” [He laughs] Rapped!

While he has been talking JACOB has been busy with the trunks, and the
maid has brought ARKADINA her hat, coat, parasol, and gloves. The cook
looks hesitatingly through the door on the right, and finally comes into
the room. PAULINA comes in. MEDVIEDENKO comes in.

PAULINA. [Presenting ARKADINA with a little basket] Here are some
plums for the journey. They are very sweet ones. You may want to nibble
something good on the way.

ARKADINA. You are very kind, Paulina.

PAULINA. Good-bye, my dearie. If things have not been quite as you could
have wished, please forgive us. [She weeps.]

ARKADINA. It has been delightful, delightful. You mustn’t cry.

SORIN comes in through the door on the left, dressed in a long coat with
a cape, and carrying his hat and cane. He crosses the room.

SORIN. Come, sister, it is time to start, unless you want to miss the
train. I am going to get into the carriage. [He goes out.]

MEDVIEDENKO. I shall walk quickly to the station and see you off there.
[He goes out.]

ARKADINA. Good-bye, all! We shall meet again next summer if we live.
[The maid servant, JACOB, and the cook kiss her hand] Don’t forget me.
[She gives the cook a rouble] There is a rouble for all three of you.

THE COOK. Thank you, mistress; a pleasant journey to you.

JACOB. God bless you, mistress.

SHAMRAEFF. Send us a line to cheer us up. [TO TRIGORIN] Good-bye, sir.

ARKADINA. Where is Constantine? Tell him I am starting. I must say
good-bye to him. [To JACOB] I gave the cook a rouble for all three of
you.

All go out through the door on the right. The stage remains empty.
Sounds of farewell are heard. The maid comes running back to fetch the
basket of plums which has been forgotten. TRIGORIN comes back.

TRIGORIN. I had forgotten my cane. I think I left it on the terrace. [He
goes toward the door on the right and meets NINA, who comes in at that
moment] Is that you? We are off.

NINA. I knew we should meet again. [With emotion] I have come to an
irrevocable decision, the die is cast: I am going on the stage. I am
deserting my father and abandoning everything. I am beginning life anew.
I am going, as you are, to Moscow. We shall meet there.

TRIGORIN. [Glancing about him] Go to the Hotel Slavianski Bazar. Let
me know as soon as you get there. I shall be at the Grosholski House in
Moltchanofka Street. I must go now. [A pause.]

NINA. Just one more minute!

TRIGORIN. [In a low voice] You are so beautiful! What bliss to think
that I shall see you again so soon! [She sinks on his breast] I shall
see those glorious eyes again, that wonderful, ineffably tender smile,
those gentle features with their expression of angelic purity! My
darling! [A prolonged kiss.]

The curtain falls.

Two years elapse between the third and fourth acts.




ACT IV

_A sitting-room in SORIN’S house, which has been converted into a
writing-room for TREPLIEFF. To the right and left are doors leading into
inner rooms, and in the centre is a glass door opening onto a terrace.
Besides the usual furniture of a sitting-room there is a writing-desk
in the right-hand corner of the room. There is a Turkish divan near the
door on the left, and shelves full of books stand against the walls.
Books are lying scattered about on the windowsills and chairs. It is
evening. The room is dimly lighted by a shaded lamp on a table. The wind
moans in the tree tops and whistles down the chimney. The watchman in
the garden is heard sounding his rattle. MEDVIEDENKO and MASHA come in_.

MASHA. [Calling TREPLIEFF] Mr. Constantine, where are you? [Looking
about her] There is no one here. His old uncle is forever asking for
Constantine, and can’t live without him for an instant.

MEDVIEDENKO. He dreads being left alone. [Listening to the wind] This is
a wild night. We have had this storm for two days.

MASHA. [Turning up the lamp] The waves on the lake are enormous.

MEDVIEDENKO. It is very dark in the garden. Do you know, I think that
old theatre ought to be knocked down. It is still standing there, naked
and hideous as a skeleton, with the curtain flapping in the wind. I
thought I heard a voice weeping in it as I passed there last night.

MASHA. What an idea! [A pause.]

MEDVIEDENKO. Come home with me, Masha.

MASHA. [Shaking her head] I shall spend the night here.

MEDVIEDENKO. [Imploringly] Do come, Masha. The baby must be hungry.

MASHA. Nonsense, Matriona will feed it. [A pause.]

MEDVIEDENKO. It is a pity to leave him three nights without his mother.

MASHA. You are getting too tiresome. You used sometimes to talk of other
things besides home and the baby, home and the baby. That is all I ever
hear from you now.

MEDVIEDENKO. Come home, Masha.

MASHA. You can go home if you want to.

MEDVIEDENKO. Your father won’t give me a horse.

MASHA. Yes, he will; ask him.

MEDVIEDENKO. I think I shall. Are you coming home to-morrow?

MASHA. Yes, yes, to-morrow.

She takes snuff. TREPLIEFF and PAULINA come in. TREPLIEFF is carrying
some pillows and a blanket, and PAULINA is carrying sheets and pillow
cases. They lay them on the divan, and TREPLIEFF goes and sits down at
his desk.

MASHA. Who is that for, mother?

PAULINA. Mr. Sorin asked to sleep in Constantine’s room to-night.

MASHA. Let me make the bed.

She makes the bed. PAULINA goes up to the desk and looks at the
manuscripts lying on it. [A pause.]

MEDVIEDENKO. Well, I am going. Good-bye, Masha. [He kisses his wife’s
hand] Good-bye, mother. [He tries to kiss his mother-in-law’s hand.]

PAULINA. [Crossly] Be off, in God’s name!

TREPLIEFF shakes hands with him in silence, and MEDVIEDENKO goes out.

PAULINA. [Looking at the manuscripts] No one ever dreamed, Constantine,
that you would one day turn into a real author. The magazines pay you
well for your stories. [She strokes his hair.] You have grown handsome,
too. Dear, kind Constantine, be a little nicer to my Masha.

MASHA. [Still making the bed] Leave him alone, mother.

PAULINA. She is a sweet child. [A pause] A woman, Constantine, asks only
for kind looks. I know that from experience.

TREPLIEFF gets up from his desk and goes out without a word.

MASHA. There now! You have vexed him. I told you not to bother him.

PAULINA. I am sorry for you, Masha.

MASHA. Much I need your pity!

PAULINA. My heart aches for you. I see how things are, and understand.

MASHA. You see what doesn’t exist. Hopeless love is only found in
novels. It is a trifle; all one has to do is to keep a tight rein on
oneself, and keep one’s head clear. Love must be plucked out the moment
it springs up in the heart. My husband has been promised a school in
another district, and when we have once left this place I shall forget
it all. I shall tear my passion out by the roots. [The notes of a
melancholy waltz are heard in the distance.]

PAULINA. Constantine is playing. That means he is sad.

MASHA silently waltzes a few turns to the music.

MASHA. The great thing, mother, is not to have him continually in sight.
If my Simon could only get his remove I should forget it all in a month
or two. It is a trifle.

DORN and MEDVIEDENKO come in through the door on the left, wheeling
SORIN in an arm-chair.

MEDVIEDENKO. I have six mouths to feed now, and flour is at seventy
kopecks.

DORN. A hard riddle to solve!

MEDVIEDENKO. It is easy for you to make light of it. You are rich enough
to scatter money to your chickens, if you wanted to.

DORN. You think I am rich? My friend, after practising for thirty years,
during which I could not call my soul my own for one minute of the night
or day, I succeeded at last in scraping together one thousand roubles,
all of which went, not long ago, in a trip which I took abroad. I
haven’t a penny.

MASHA. [To her husband] So you didn’t go home after all?

MEDVIEDENKO. [Apologetically] How can I go home when they won’t give me
a horse?

MASHA. [Under her breath, with bitter anger] Would I might never see
your face again!

SORIN in his chair is wheeled to the left-hand side of the room.
PAULINA, MASHA, and DORN sit down beside him. MEDVIEDENKO stands sadly
aside.

DORN. What a lot of changes you have made here! You have turned this
sitting-room into a library.

MASHA. Constantine likes to work in this room, because from it he can
step out into the garden to meditate whenever he feels like it. [The
watchman’s rattle is heard.]

SORIN. Where is my sister?

DORN. She has gone to the station to meet Trigorin. She will soon be
back.

SORIN. I must be dangerously ill if you had to send for my sister.
[He falls silent for a moment] A nice business this is! Here I am
dangerously ill, and you won’t even give me any medicine.

DORN. What shall I prescribe for you? Camomile tea? Soda? Quinine?

SORIN. Don’t inflict any of your discussions on me again. [He nods
toward the sofa] Is that bed for me?

PAULINA. Yes, for you, sir.

SORIN. Thank you.

DORN. [Sings] “The moon swims in the sky to-night.”

SORIN. I am going to give Constantine an idea for a story. It shall be
called “The Man Who Wished--L’Homme qui a voulu.” When I was young, I
wished to become an author; I failed. I wished to be an orator; I speak
abominably, [Exciting himself] with my eternal “and all, and all,”
 dragging each sentence on and on until I sometimes break out into a
sweat all over. I wished to marry, and I didn’t; I wished to live in the
city, and here I am ending my days in the country, and all.

DORN. You wished to become State Councillor, and--you are one!

SORIN. [Laughing] I didn’t try for that, it came of its own accord.

DORN. Come, you must admit that it is petty to cavil at life at
sixty-two years of age.

SORIN. You are pig-headed! Can’t you see I want to live?

DORN. That is futile. Nature has commanded that every life shall come to
an end.

SORIN. You speak like a man who is satiated with life. Your thirst for
it is quenched, and so you are calm and indifferent, but even you dread
death.

DORN. The fear of death is an animal passion which must be overcome.
Only those who believe in a future life and tremble for sins committed,
can logically fear death; but you, for one thing, don’t believe in a
future life, and for another, you haven’t committed any sins. You have
served as a Councillor for twenty-five years, that is all.

SORIN. [Laughing] Twenty-eight years!

TREPLIEFF comes in and sits down on a stool at SORIN’S feet. MASHA fixes
her eyes on his face and never once tears them away.

DORN. We are keeping Constantine from his work.

TREPLIEFF. No matter. [A pause.]

MEDVIEDENKO. Of all the cities you visited when you were abroad, Doctor,
which one did you like the best?

DORN. Genoa.

TREPLIEFF. Why Genoa?

DORN. Because there is such a splendid crowd in its streets. When you
leave the hotel in the evening, and throw yourself into the heart of
that throng, and move with it without aim or object, swept along, hither
and thither, their life seems to be yours, their soul flows into you,
and you begin to believe at last in a great world spirit, like the one
in your play that Nina Zarietchnaya acted. By the way, where is Nina
now? Is she well?

TREPLIEFF. I believe so.

DORN. I hear she has led rather a strange life; what happened?

TREPLIEFF. It is a long story, Doctor.

DORN. Tell it shortly. [A pause.]

TREPLIEFF. She ran away from home and joined Trigorin; you know that?

DORN. Yes.

TREPLIEFF. She had a child that died. Trigorin soon tired of her and
returned to his former ties, as might have been expected. He had
never broken them, indeed, but out of weakness of character had always
vacillated between the two. As far as I can make out from what I have
heard, Nina’s domestic life has not been altogether a success.

DORN. What about her acting?

TREPLIEFF. I believe she made an even worse failure of that. She made
her debut on the stage of the Summer Theatre in Moscow, and afterward
made a tour of the country towns. At that time I never let her out of my
sight, and wherever she went I followed. She always attempted great
and difficult parts, but her delivery was harsh and monotonous, and her
gestures heavy and crude. She shrieked and died well at times, but those
were but moments.

DORN. Then she really has a talent for acting?

TREPLIEFF. I never could make out. I believe she has. I saw her, but she
refused to see me, and her servant would never admit me to her rooms. I
appreciated her feelings, and did not insist upon a meeting. [A pause]
What more can I tell you? She sometimes writes to me now that I have
come home, such clever, sympathetic letters, full of warm feeling. She
never complains, but I can tell that she is profoundly unhappy; not a
line but speaks to me of an aching, breaking nerve. She has one strange
fancy; she always signs herself “The Sea-gull.” The miller in “Rusalka”
 called himself “The Crow,” and so she repeats in all her letters that
she is a sea-gull. She is here now.

DORN. What do you mean by “here?”

TREPLIEFF. In the village, at the inn. She has been there for five days.
I should have gone to see her, but Masha here went, and she refuses to
see any one. Some one told me she had been seen wandering in the fields
a mile from here yesterday evening.

MEDVIEDENKO. Yes, I saw her. She was walking away from here in the
direction of the village. I asked her why she had not been to see us.
She said she would come.

TREPLIEFF. But she won’t. [A pause] Her father and stepmother have
disowned her. They have even put watchmen all around their estate to
keep her away. [He goes with the doctor toward the desk] How easy it is,
Doctor, to be a philosopher on paper, and how difficult in real life!

SORIN. She was a beautiful girl. Even the State Councillor himself was
in love with her for a time.

DORN. You old Lovelace, you!

SHAMRAEFF’S laugh is heard.

PAULINA. They are coming back from the station.

TREPLIEFF. Yes, I hear my mother’s voice.

ARKADINA and TRIGORIN come in, followed by SHAMRAEFF.

SHAMRAEFF. We all grow old and wither, my lady, while you alone, with
your light dress, your gay spirits, and your grace, keep the secret of
eternal youth.

ARKADINA. You are still trying to turn my head, you tiresome old man.

TRIGORIN. [To SORIN] How do you do, Peter? What, still ill? How silly of
you! [With evident pleasure, as he catches sight of MASHA] How are you,
Miss Masha?

MASHA. So you recognised me? [She shakes hands with him.]

TRIGORIN. Did you marry him?

MASHA. Long ago.

TRIGORIN. You are happy now? [He bows to DORN and MEDVIEDENKO, and then
goes hesitatingly toward TREPLIEFF] Your mother says you have forgotten
the past and are no longer angry with me.

TREPLIEFF gives him his hand.

ARKADINA. [To her son] Here is a magazine that Boris has brought you
with your latest story in it.

TREPLIEFF. [To TRIGORIN, as he takes the magazine] Many thanks; you are
very kind.

TRIGORIN. Your admirers all send you their regards. Every one in Moscow
and St. Petersburg is interested in you, and all ply me with questions
about you. They ask me what you look like, how old you are, whether you
are fair or dark. For some reason they all think that you are no longer
young, and no one knows who you are, as you always write under an
assumed name. You are as great a mystery as the Man in the Iron Mask.

TREPLIEFF. Do you expect to be here long?

TRIGORIN. No, I must go back to Moscow to-morrow. I am finishing another
novel, and have promised something to a magazine besides. In fact, it is
the same old business.

During their conversation ARKADINA and PAULINA have put up a card-table
in the centre of the room; SHAMRAEFF lights the candles and arranges the
chairs, then fetches a box of lotto from the cupboard.

TRIGORIN. The weather has given me a rough welcome. The wind is
frightful. If it goes down by morning I shall go fishing in the
lake, and shall have a look at the garden and the spot--do you
remember?--where your play was given. I remember the piece very well,
but should like to see again where the scene was laid.

MASHA. [To her father] Father, do please let my husband have a horse. He
ought to go home.

SHAMRAEFF. [Angrily] A horse to go home with! [Sternly] You know the
horses have just been to the station. I can’t send them out again.

MASHA. But there are other horses. [Seeing that her father remains
silent] You are impossible!

MEDVIEDENKO. I shall go on foot, Masha.

PAULINA. [With a sigh] On foot in this weather? [She takes a seat at the
card-table] Shall we begin?

MEDVIEDENKO. It is only six miles. Good-bye. [He kisses his wife’s
hand;] Good-bye, mother. [His mother-in-law gives him her hand
unwillingly] I should not have troubled you all, but the baby--[He bows
to every one] Good-bye. [He goes out with an apologetic air.]

SHAMRAEFF. He will get there all right, he is not a major-general.

PAULINA. Come, let us begin. Don’t let us waste time, we shall soon be
called to supper.

SHAMRAEFF, MASHA, and DORN sit down at the card-table.

ARKADINA. [To TRIGORIN] When the long autumn evenings descend on us we
while away the time here by playing lotto. Look at this old set; we used
it when our mother played with us as children. Don’t you want to take a
hand in the game with us until supper time? [She and TRIGORIN sit down
at the table] It is a monotonous game, but it is all right when one gets
used to it. [She deals three cards to each of the players.]

TREPLIEFF. [Looking through the pages of the magazine] He has read his
own story, and hasn’t even cut the pages of mine.

He lays the magazine on his desk and goes toward the door on the right,
stopping as he passes his mother to give her a kiss.

ARKADINA. Won’t you play, Constantine?

TREPLIEFF. No, excuse me please, I don’t feel like it. I am going to
take a turn through the rooms. [He goes out.]

MASHA. Are you all ready? I shall begin: twenty-two.

ARKADINA. Here it is.

MASHA. Three.

DORN. Right.

MASHA. Have you put down three? Eight. Eighty-one. Ten.

SHAMRAEFF. Don’t go so fast.

ARKADINA. Could you believe it? I am still dazed by the reception they
gave me in Kharkoff.

MASHA. Thirty-four. [The notes of a melancholy waltz are heard.]

ARKADINA. The students gave me an ovation; they sent me three baskets of
flowers, a wreath, and this thing here.

She unclasps a brooch from her breast and lays it on the table.

SHAMRAEFF. There is something worth while!

MASHA. Fifty.

DORN. Fifty, did you say?

ARKADINA. I wore a perfectly magnificent dress; I am no fool when it
comes to clothes.

PAULINA. Constantine is playing again; the poor boy is sad.

SHAMRAEFF. He has been severely criticised in the papers.

MASHA. Seventy-seven.

ARKADINA. They want to attract attention to him.

TRIGORIN. He doesn’t seem able to make a success, he can’t somehow
strike the right note. There is an odd vagueness about his writings
that sometimes verges on delirium. He has never created a single living
character.

MASHA. Eleven.

ARKADINA. Are you bored, Peter? [A pause] He is asleep.

DORN. The Councillor is taking a nap.

MASHA. Seven. Ninety.

TRIGORIN. Do you think I should write if I lived in such a place as
this, on the shore of this lake? Never! I should overcome my passion,
and give my life up to the catching of fish.

MASHA. Twenty-eight.

TRIGORIN. And if I caught a perch or a bass, what bliss it would be!

DORN. I have great faith in Constantine. I know there is something in
him. He thinks in images; his stories are vivid and full of colour,
and always affect me deeply. It is only a pity that he has no definite
object in view. He creates impressions, and nothing more, and one cannot
go far on impressions alone. Are you glad, madam, that you have an
author for a son?

ARKADINA. Just think, I have never read anything of his; I never have
time.

MASHA. Twenty-six.

TREPLIEFF comes in quietly and sits down at his table.

SHAMRAEFF. [To TRIGORIN] We have something here that belongs to you,
sir.

TRIGORIN. What is it?

SHAMRAEFF. You told me to have the sea-gull stuffed that Mr. Constantine
killed some time ago.

TRIGORIN. Did I? [Thoughtfully] I don’t remember.

MASHA. Sixty-one. One.

TREPLIEFF throws open the window and stands listening.

TREPLIEFF. How dark the night is! I wonder what makes me so restless.

ARKADINA. Shut the window, Constantine, there is a draught here.

TREPLIEFF shuts the window.

MASHA. Ninety-eight.

TRIGORIN. See, my card is full.

ARKADINA. [Gaily] Bravo! Bravo!

SHAMRAEFF. Bravo!

ARKADINA. Wherever he goes and whatever he does, that man always has
good luck. [She gets up] And now, come to supper. Our renowned guest did
not have any dinner to-day. We can continue our game later. [To her son]
Come, Constantine, leave your writing and come to supper.

TREPLIEFF. I don’t want anything to eat, mother; I am not hungry.

ARKADINA. As you please. [She wakes SORIN] Come to supper, Peter. [She
takes SHAMRAEFF’S arm] Let me tell you about my reception in Kharkoff.

PAULINA blows out the candles on the table, then she and DORN roll
SORIN’S chair out of the room, and all go out through the door on the
left, except TREPLIEFF, who is left alone. TREPLIEFF prepares to write.
He runs his eye over what he has already written.

TREPLIEFF. I have talked a great deal about new forms of art, but I feel
myself gradually slipping into the beaten track. [He reads] “The
placard cried it from the wall--a pale face in a frame of dusky
hair”--cried--frame--that is stupid. [He scratches out what he has
written] I shall begin again from the place where my hero is wakened by
the noise of the rain, but what follows must go. This description of a
moonlight night is long and stilted. Trigorin has worked out a process
of his own, and descriptions are easy for him. He writes that the neck
of a broken bottle lying on the bank glittered in the moonlight, and
that the shadows lay black under the mill-wheel. There you have a
moonlight night before your eyes, but I speak of the shimmering light,
the twinkling stars, the distant sounds of a piano melting into the
still and scented air, and the result is abominable. [A pause] The
conviction is gradually forcing itself upon me that good literature is
not a question of forms new or old, but of ideas that must pour freely
from the author’s heart, without his bothering his head about any forms
whatsoever. [A knock is heard at the window nearest the table] What was
that? [He looks out of the window] I can’t see anything. [He opens the
glass door and looks out into the garden] I heard some one run down
the steps. [He calls] Who is there? [He goes out, and is heard walking
quickly along the terrace. In a few minutes he comes back with NINA
ZARIETCHNAYA] Oh, Nina, Nina!

NINA lays her head on TREPLIEFF’S breast and stifles her sobs.

TREPLIEFF. [Deeply moved] Nina, Nina! It is you--you! I felt you would
come; all day my heart has been aching for you. [He takes off her hat
and cloak] My darling, my beloved has come back to me! We mustn’t cry,
we mustn’t cry.

NINA. There is some one here.

TREPLIEFF. No one is here.

NINA. Lock the door, some one might come.

TREPLIEFF. No one will come in.

NINA. I know your mother is here. Lock the door.

TREPLIEFF locks the door on the right and comes back to NINA.

TREPLIEFF. There is no lock on that one. I shall put a chair against
it. [He puts an arm-chair against the door] Don’t be frightened, no one
shall come in.

NINA. [Gazing intently into his face] Let me look at you. [She looks
about her] It is warm and comfortable in here. This used to be a
sitting-room. Have I changed much?

TREPLIEFF. Yes, you have grown thinner, and your eyes are larger than
they were. Nina, it seems so strange to see you! Why didn’t you let me
go to you? Why didn’t you come sooner to me? You have been here nearly a
week, I know. I have been several times each day to where you live, and
have stood like a beggar beneath your window.

NINA. I was afraid you might hate me. I dream every night that you look
at me without recognising me. I have been wandering about on the shores
of the lake ever since I came back. I have often been near your house,
but I have never had the courage to come in. Let us sit down. [They sit
down] Let us sit down and talk our hearts out. It is so quiet and warm
in here. Do you hear the wind whistling outside? As Turgenieff says,
“Happy is he who can sit at night under the roof of his home, who has a
warm corner in which to take refuge.” I am a sea-gull--and yet--no.
[She passes her hand across her forehead] What was I saying? Oh, yes,
Turgenieff. He says, “and God help all houseless wanderers.” [She sobs.]

TREPLIEFF. Nina! You are crying again, Nina!

NINA. It is all right. I shall feel better after this. I have not cried
for two years. I went into the garden last night to see if our old
theatre were still standing. I see it is. I wept there for the first
time in two years, and my heart grew lighter, and my soul saw more
clearly again. See, I am not crying now. [She takes his hand in hers]
So you are an author now, and I am an actress. We have both been sucked
into the whirlpool. My life used to be as happy as a child’s; I used to
wake singing in the morning; I loved you and dreamt of fame, and what is
the reality? To-morrow morning early I must start for Eltz by train in
a third-class carriage, with a lot of peasants, and at Eltz the educated
trades-people will pursue me with compliments. It is a rough life.

TREPLIEFF. Why are you going to Eltz?

NINA. I have accepted an engagement there for the winter. It is time for
me to go.

TREPLIEFF. Nina, I have cursed you, and hated you, and torn up your
photograph, and yet I have known every minute of my life that my heart
and soul were yours for ever. To cease from loving you is beyond my
power. I have suffered continually from the time I lost you and began
to write, and my life has been almost unendurable. My youth was suddenly
plucked from me then, and I seem now to have lived in this world for
ninety years. I have called out to you, I have kissed the ground you
walked on, wherever I looked I have seen your face before my eyes, and
the smile that had illumined for me the best years of my life.

NINA. [Despairingly] Why, why does he talk to me like this?

TREPLIEFF. I am quite alone, unwarmed by any attachment. I am as cold
as if I were living in a cave. Whatever I write is dry and gloomy and
harsh. Stay here, Nina, I beseech you, or else let me go away with you.

NINA quickly puts on her coat and hat.

TREPLIEFF. Nina, why do you do that? For God’s sake, Nina! [He watches
her as she dresses. A pause.]

NINA. My carriage is at the gate. Do not come out to see me off. I shall
find the way alone. [Weeping] Let me have some water.

TREPLIEFF hands her a glass of water.

TREPLIEFF. Where are you going?

NINA. Back to the village. Is your mother here?

TREPLIEFF. Yes, my uncle fell ill on Thursday, and we telegraphed for
her to come.

NINA. Why do you say that you have kissed the ground I walked on? You
should kill me rather. [She bends over the table] I am so tired. If I
could only rest--rest. [She raises her head] I am a sea-gull--no--no,
I am an actress. [She hears ARKADINA and TRIGORIN laughing in the
distance, runs to the door on the left and looks through the keyhole] He
is there too. [She goes back to TREPLIEFF] Ah, well--no matter. He
does not believe in the theatre; he used to laugh at my dreams, so that
little by little I became down-hearted and ceased to believe in it too.
Then came all the cares of love, the continual anxiety about my little
one, so that I soon grew trivial and spiritless, and played my parts
without meaning. I never knew what to do with my hands, and I could not
walk properly or control my voice. You cannot imagine the state of mind
of one who knows as he goes through a play how terribly badly he is
acting. I am a sea-gull--no--no, that is not what I meant to say. Do you
remember how you shot a seagull once? A man chanced to pass that way and
destroyed it out of idleness. That is an idea for a short story, but it
is not what I meant to say. [She passes her hand across her forehead]
What was I saying? Oh, yes, the stage. I have changed now. Now I am a
real actress. I act with joy, with exaltation, I am intoxicated by it,
and feel that I am superb. I have been walking and walking, and thinking
and thinking, ever since I have been here, and I feel the strength of
my spirit growing in me every day. I know now, I understand at last,
Constantine, that for us, whether we write or act, it is not the honour
and glory of which I have dreamt that is important, it is the strength
to endure. One must know how to bear one’s cross, and one must have
faith. I believe, and so do not suffer so much, and when I think of my
calling I do not fear life.

TREPLIEFF. [Sadly] You have found your way, you know where you are
going, but I am still groping in a chaos of phantoms and dreams, not
knowing whom and what end I am serving by it all. I do not believe in
anything, and I do not know what my calling is.

NINA. [Listening] Hush! I must go. Good-bye. When I have become a
famous actress you must come and see me. Will you promise to come? But
now--[She takes his hand] it is late. I can hardly stand. I am fainting.
I am hungry.

TREPLIEFF. Stay, and let me bring you some supper.

NINA. No, no--and don’t come out, I can find the way alone. My carriage
is not far away. So she brought him back with her? However, what
difference can that make to me? Don’t tell Trigorin anything when you
see him. I love him--I love him even more than I used to. It is an idea
for a short story. I love him--I love him passionately--I love him to
despair. Have you forgotten, Constantine, how pleasant the old times
were? What a gay, bright, gentle, pure life we led? How a feeling as
sweet and tender as a flower blossomed in our hearts? Do you remember,
[She recites] “All men and beasts, lions, eagles, and quails, horned
stags, geese, spiders, silent fish that inhabit the waves, starfish from
the sea, and creatures invisible to the eye--in one word, life--all, all
life, completing the dreary round set before it, has died out at last.
A thousand years have passed since the earth last bore a living creature
on its breast, and the unhappy moon now lights her lamp in vain. No
longer are the cries of storks heard in the meadows, or the drone of
beetles in the groves of limes----”

She embraces TREPLIEFF impetuously and runs out onto the terrace.

TREPLIEFF. [After a pause] It would be a pity if she were seen in the
garden. My mother would be distressed.

He stands for several minutes tearing up his manuscripts and throwing
them under the table, then unlocks the door on the right and goes out.

DORN. [Trying to force open the door on the left] Odd! This door seems
to be locked. [He comes in and puts the chair back in its former place]
This is like a hurdle race.

ARKADINA and PAULINA come in, followed by JACOB carrying some bottles;
then come MASHA, SHAMRAEFF, and TRIGORIN.

ARKADINA. Put the claret and the beer here, on the table, so that we can
drink while we are playing. Sit down, friends.

PAULINA. And bring the tea at once.

She lights the candles and takes her seat at the card-table. SHAMRAEFF
leads TRIGORIN to the cupboard.

SHAMRAEFF. Here is the stuffed sea-gull I was telling you about. [He
takes the sea-gull out of the cupboard] You told me to have it done.

TRIGORIN. [looking at the bird] I don’t remember a thing about it, not a
thing. [A shot is heard. Every one jumps.]

ARKADINA. [Frightened] What was that?

DORN. Nothing at all; probably one of my medicine bottles has blown up.
Don’t worry. [He goes out through the door on the right, and comes back
in a few moments] It is as I thought, a flask of ether has exploded. [He
sings]

“Spellbound once more I stand before thee.”

ARKADINA. [Sitting down at the table] Heavens! I was really frightened.
That noise reminded me of--[She covers her face with her hands]
Everything is black before my eyes.

DORN. [Looking through the pages of a magazine, to TRIGORIN] There was
an article from America in this magazine about two months ago that I
wanted to ask you about, among other things. [He leads TRIGORIN to the
front of the stage] I am very much interested in this question. [He
lowers his voice and whispers] You must take Madame Arkadina away from
here; what I wanted to say was, that Constantine has shot himself.

ACT I

A country house on a terrace. In front of it a garden. In an avenue of
trees, under an old poplar, stands a table set for tea, with a samovar,
etc. Some benches and chairs stand near the table. On one of them is
lying a guitar. A hammock is swung near the table. It is three o'clock
in the afternoon of a cloudy day.

MARINA, a quiet, grey-haired, little old woman, is sitting at the table
knitting a stocking.

ASTROFF is walking up and down near her.

MARINA. [Pouring some tea into a glass] Take a little tea, my son.

ASTROFF. [Takes the glass from her unwillingly] Somehow, I don't seem to
want any.

MARINA. Then will you have a little vodka instead?

ASTROFF. No, I don't drink vodka every day, and besides, it is too hot
now. [A pause] Tell me, nurse, how long have we known each other?

MARINA. [Thoughtfully] Let me see, how long is it? Lord--help me to
remember. You first came here, into our parts--let me think--when was
it? Sonia's mother was still alive--it was two winters before she died;
that was eleven years ago--[thoughtfully] perhaps more.

ASTROFF. Have I changed much since then?

MARINA. Oh, yes. You were handsome and young then, and now you are an
old man and not handsome any more. You drink, too.

ASTROFF. Yes, ten years have made me another man. And why? Because I am
overworked. Nurse, I am on my feet from dawn till dusk. I know no rest;
at night I tremble under my blankets for fear of being dragged out to
visit some one who is sick; I have toiled without repose or a day's
freedom since I have known you; could I help growing old? And then,
existence is tedious, anyway; it is a senseless, dirty business, this
life, and goes heavily. Every one about here is silly, and after
living with them for two or three years one grows silly oneself. It is
inevitable. [Twisting his moustache] See what a long moustache I have
grown. A foolish, long moustache. Yes, I am as silly as the rest, nurse,
but not as stupid; no, I have not grown stupid. Thank God, my brain is
not addled yet, though my feelings have grown numb. I ask nothing, I
need nothing, I love no one, unless it is yourself alone. [He kisses her
head] I had a nurse just like you when I was a child.

MARINA. Don't you want a bite of something to eat?

ASTROFF. No. During the third week of Lent I went to the epidemic at
Malitskoi. It was eruptive typhoid. The peasants were all lying side by
side in their huts, and the calves and pigs were running about the floor
among the sick. Such dirt there was, and smoke! Unspeakable! I slaved
among those people all day, not a crumb passed my lips, but when I got
home there was still no rest for me; a switchman was carried in from the
railroad; I laid him on the operating table and he went and died in
my arms under chloroform, and then my feelings that should have been
deadened awoke again, my conscience tortured me as if I had killed the
man. I sat down and closed my eyes--like this--and thought: will our
descendants two hundred years from now, for whom we are breaking the
road, remember to give us a kind word? No, nurse, they will forget.

MARINA. Man is forgetful, but God remembers.

ASTROFF. Thank you for that. You have spoken the truth.

Enter VOITSKI from the house. He has been asleep after dinner and
looks rather dishevelled. He sits down on the bench and straightens his
collar.

VOITSKI. H'm. Yes. [A pause] Yes.

ASTROFF. Have you been asleep?

VOITSKI. Yes, very much so. [He yawns] Ever since the Professor and his
wife have come, our daily life seems to have jumped the track. I sleep
at the wrong time, drink wine, and eat all sorts of messes for luncheon
and dinner. It isn't wholesome. Sonia and I used to work together and
never had an idle moment, but now Sonia works alone and I only eat and
drink and sleep. Something is wrong.

MARINA. [Shaking her head] Such a confusion in the house! The Professor
gets up at twelve, the samovar is kept boiling all the morning, and
everything has to wait for him. Before they came we used to have dinner
at one o'clock, like everybody else, but now we have it at seven. The
Professor sits up all night writing and reading, and suddenly, at two
o'clock, there goes the bell! Heavens, what is that? The Professor wants
some tea! Wake the servants, light the samovar! Lord, what disorder!

ASTROFF. Will they be here long?

VOITSKI. A hundred years! The Professor has decided to make his home
here.

MARINA. Look at this now! The samovar has been on the table for two
hours, and they are all out walking!

VOITSKI. All right, don't get excited; here they come.

Voices are heard approaching. SEREBRAKOFF, HELENA, SONIA, and TELEGIN
come in from the depths of the garden, returning from their walk.

SEREBRAKOFF. Superb! Superb! What beautiful views!

TELEGIN. They are wonderful, your Excellency.

SONIA. To-morrow we shall go into the woods, shall we, papa?

VOITSKI. Ladies and gentlemen, tea is ready.

SEREBRAKOFF. Won't you please be good enough to send my tea into the
library? I still have some work to finish.

SONIA. I am sure you will love the woods.

HELENA, SEREBRAKOFF, and SONIA go into the house. TELEGIN sits down at
the table beside MARINA.

VOITSKI. There goes our learned scholar on a hot, sultry day like this,
in his overcoat and goloshes and carrying an umbrella!

ASTROFF. He is trying to take good care of his health.

VOITSKI. How lovely she is! How lovely! I have never in my life seen a
more beautiful woman.

TELEGIN. Do you know, Marina, that as I walk in the fields or in
the shady garden, as I look at this table here, my heart swells with
unbounded happiness. The weather is enchanting, the birds are singing,
we are all living in peace and contentment--what more could the soul
desire? [Takes a glass of tea.]

VOITSKI. [Dreaming] Such eyes--a glorious woman!

ASTROFF. Come, Ivan, tell us something.

VOITSKI. [Indolently] What shall I tell you?

ASTROFF. Haven't you any news for us?

VOITSKI. No, it is all stale. I am just the same as usual, or perhaps
worse, because I have become lazy. I don't do anything now but croak
like an old raven. My mother, the old magpie, is still chattering about
the emancipation of woman, with one eye on her grave and the other on
her learned books, in which she is always looking for the dawn of a new
life.

ASTROFF. And the Professor?

VOITSKI. The Professor sits in his library from morning till night, as
usual--

   "Straining the mind, wrinkling the brow,
    We write, write, write,
    Without respite
    Or hope of praise in the future or now."

Poor paper! He ought to write his autobiography; he would make a
really splendid subject for a book! Imagine it, the life of a retired
professor, as stale as a piece of hardtack, tortured by gout, headaches,
and rheumatism, his liver bursting with jealousy and envy, living on the
estate of his first wife, although he hates it, because he can't afford
to live in town. He is everlastingly whining about his hard lot, though,
as a matter of fact, he is extraordinarily lucky. He is the son of
a common deacon and has attained the professor's chair, become the
son-in-law of a senator, is called "your Excellency," and so on. But
I'll tell you something; the man has been writing on art for twenty-five
years, and he doesn't know the very first thing about it. For
twenty-five years he has been chewing on other men's thoughts about
realism, naturalism, and all such foolishness; for twenty-five years he
has been reading and writing things that clever men have long known and
stupid ones are not interested in; for twenty-five years he has been
making his imaginary mountains out of molehills. And just think of the
man's self-conceit and presumption all this time! For twenty-five years
he has been masquerading in false clothes and has now retired absolutely
unknown to any living soul; and yet see him! stalking across the earth
like a demi-god!

ASTROFF. I believe you envy him.

VOITSKI. Yes, I do. Look at the success he has had with women! Don Juan
himself was not more favoured. His first wife, who was my sister, was
a beautiful, gentle being, as pure as the blue heaven there above us,
noble, great-hearted, with more admirers than he has pupils, and she
loved him as only beings of angelic purity can love those who are as
pure and beautiful as themselves. His mother-in-law, my mother, adores
him to this day, and he still inspires a sort of worshipful awe in her.
His second wife is, as you see, a brilliant beauty; she married him in
his old age and has surrendered all the glory of her beauty and freedom
to him. Why? What for?

ASTROFF. Is she faithful to him?

VOITSKI. Yes, unfortunately she is.

ASTROFF. Why unfortunately?

VOITSKI. Because such fidelity is false and unnatural, root and branch.
It sounds well, but there is no logic in it. It is thought immoral for a
woman to deceive an old husband whom she hates, but quite moral for her
to strangle her poor youth in her breast and banish every vital desire
from her heart.

TELEGIN. [In a tearful voice] Vanya, I don't like to hear you talk so.
Listen, Vanya; every one who betrays husband or wife is faithless, and
could also betray his country.

VOITSKI. [Crossly] Turn off the tap, Waffles.

TELEGIN. No, allow me, Vanya. My wife ran away with a lover on the day
after our wedding, because my exterior was unprepossessing. I have never
failed in my duty since then. I love her and am true to her to this day.
I help her all I can and have given my fortune to educate the daughter
of herself and her lover. I have forfeited my happiness, but I have kept
my pride. And she? Her youth has fled, her beauty has faded according to
the laws of nature, and her lover is dead. What has she kept?

HELENA and SONIA come in; after them comes MME. VOITSKAYA carrying a
book. She sits down and begins to read. Some one hands her a glass of
tea which she drinks without looking up.

SONIA. [Hurriedly, to the nurse] There are some peasants waiting out
there. Go and see what they want. I shall pour the tea. [Pours out some
glasses of tea.]

MARINA goes out. HELENA takes a glass and sits drinking in the hammock.

ASTROFF. I have come to see your husband. You wrote me that he had
rheumatism and I know not what else, and that he was very ill, but he
appears to be as lively as a cricket.

HELENA. He had a fit of the blues yesterday evening and complained of
pains in his legs, but he seems all right again to-day.

ASTROFF. And I galloped over here twenty miles at break-neck speed! No
matter, though, it is not the first time. Once here, however, I am going
to stay until to-morrow, and at any rate sleep _quantum satis._

SONIA. Oh, splendid! You so seldom spend the night with us. Have you had
dinner yet?

ASTROFF. No.

SONIA. Good. So you will have it with us. We dine at seven now. [Drinks
her tea] This tea is cold!

TELEGIN. Yes, the samovar has grown cold.

HELENA. Don't mind, Monsieur Ivan, we will drink cold tea, then.

TELEGIN. I beg your pardon, my name is not Ivan, but Ilia, ma'am--Ilia
Telegin, or Waffles, as I am sometimes called on account of my
pock-marked face. I am Sonia's godfather, and his Excellency, your
husband, knows me very well. I now live with you, ma'am, on this estate,
and perhaps you will be so good as to notice that I dine with you every
day.

SONIA. He is our great help, our right-hand man. [Tenderly] Dear
godfather, let me pour you some tea.

MME. VOITSKAYA. Oh! Oh!

SONIA. What is it, grandmother?

MME. VOITSKAYA. I forgot to tell Alexander--I have lost my memory--I
received a letter to-day from Paul Alexevitch in Kharkoff. He has sent
me a new pamphlet.

ASTROFF. Is it interesting?

MME. VOITSKAYA. Yes, but strange. He refutes the very theories which he
defended seven years ago. It is appalling!

VOITSKI. There is nothing appalling about it. Drink your tea, mamma.

MME. VOITSKAYA. It seems you never want to listen to what I have to say.
Pardon me, Jean, but you have changed so in the last year that I
hardly know you. You used to be a man of settled convictions and had an
illuminating personality----

VOITSKI. Oh, yes. I had an illuminating personality, which illuminated
no one. [A pause] I had an illuminating personality! You couldn't say
anything more biting. I am forty-seven years old. Until last year I
endeavoured, as you do now, to blind my eyes by your pedantry to the
truths of life. But now--Oh, if you only knew! If you knew how I lie
awake at night, heartsick and angry, to think how stupidly I have wasted
my time when I might have been winning from life everything which my old
age now forbids.

SONIA. Uncle Vanya, how dreary!

MME. VOITSKAYA. [To her son] You speak as if your former convictions
were somehow to blame, but you yourself, not they, were at fault. You
have forgotten that a conviction, in itself, is nothing but a dead
letter. You should have done something.

VOITSKI. Done something! Not every man is capable of being a writer
_perpetuum mobile_ like your Herr Professor.

MME. VOITSKAYA. What do you mean by that?

SONIA. [Imploringly] Mother! Uncle Vanya! I entreat you!

VOITSKI. I am silent. I apologise and am silent. [A pause.]

HELENA. What a fine day! Not too hot. [A pause.]

VOITSKI. A fine day to hang oneself.

TELEGIN tunes the guitar. MARINA appears near the house, calling the
chickens.

MARINA. Chick, chick, chick!

SONIA. What did the peasants want, nurse?

MARINA. The same old thing, the same old nonsense. Chick, chick, chick!

SONIA. Why are you calling the chickens?

MARINA. The speckled hen has disappeared with her chicks. I am afraid
the crows have got her.

TELEGIN plays a polka. All listen in silence. Enter WORKMAN.

WORKMAN. Is the doctor here? [To ASTROFF] Excuse me, sir, but I have
been sent to fetch you.

ASTROFF. Where are you from?

WORKMAN. The factory.

ASTROFF. [Annoyed] Thank you. There is nothing for it, then, but to go.
[Looking around him for his cap] Damn it, this is annoying!

SONIA. Yes, it is too bad, really. You must come back to dinner from the
factory.

ASTROFF. No, I won't be able to do that. It will be too late. Now where,
where--[To the WORKMAN] Look here, my man, get me a glass of vodka, will
you? [The WORKMAN goes out] Where--where--[Finds his cap] One of the
characters in Ostroff's plays is a man with a long moustache and short
wits, like me. However, let me bid you good-bye, ladies and gentlemen.
[To HELENA] I should be really delighted if you would come to see me
some day with Miss Sonia. My estate is small, but if you are interested
in such things I should like to show you a nursery and seed-bed whose
like you will not find within a thousand miles of here. My place is
surrounded by government forests. The forester is old and always ailing,
so I superintend almost all the work myself.

HELENA. I have always heard that you were very fond of the woods. Of
course one can do a great deal of good by helping to preserve them, but
does not that work interfere with your real calling?

ASTROFF. God alone knows what a man's real calling is.

HELENA. And do you find it interesting?

ASTROFF. Yes, very.

VOITSKI. [Sarcastically] Oh, extremely!

HELENA. You are still young, not over thirty-six or seven, I should say,
and I suspect that the woods do not interest you as much as you say they
do. I should think you would find them monotonous.

SONIA. No, the work is thrilling. Dr. Astroff watches over the old woods
and sets out new plantations every year, and he has already received a
diploma and a bronze medal. If you will listen to what he can tell you,
you will agree with him entirely. He says that forests are the ornaments
of the earth, that they teach mankind to understand beauty and attune
his mind to lofty sentiments. Forests temper a stern climate, and in
countries where the climate is milder, less strength is wasted in the
battle with nature, and the people are kind and gentle. The inhabitants
of such countries are handsome, tractable, sensitive, graceful in speech
and gesture. Their philosophy is joyous, art and science blossom among
them, their treatment of women is full of exquisite nobility----

VOITSKI. [Laughing] Bravo! Bravo! All that is very pretty, but it is
also unconvincing. So, my friend [To ASTROFF] you must let me go on
burning firewood in my stoves and building my sheds of planks.

ASTROFF. You can burn peat in your stoves and build your sheds of stone.
Oh, I don't object, of course, to cutting wood from necessity, but why
destroy the forests? The woods of Russia are trembling under the blows
of the axe. Millions of trees have perished. The homes of the wild
animals and birds have been desolated; the rivers are shrinking, and
many beautiful landscapes are gone forever. And why? Because men are too
lazy and stupid to stoop down and pick up their fuel from the ground.
[To HELENA] Am I not right, Madame? Who but a stupid barbarian could
burn so much beauty in his stove and destroy that which he cannot make?
Man is endowed with reason and the power to create, so that he may
increase that which has been given him, but until now he has not
created, but demolished. The forests are disappearing, the rivers are
running dry, the game is exterminated, the climate is spoiled, and the
earth becomes poorer and uglier every day. [To VOITSKI] I read irony in
your eye; you do not take what I am saying seriously, and--and--after
all, it may very well be nonsense. But when I pass peasant-forests
that I have preserved from the axe, or hear the rustling of the young
plantations set out with my own hands, I feel as if I had had some small
share in improving the climate, and that if mankind is happy a thousand
years from now I will have been a little bit responsible for their
happiness. When I plant a little birch tree and then see it budding
into young green and swaying in the wind, my heart swells with pride and
I--[Sees the WORKMAN, who is bringing him a glass of vodka on a tray]
however--[He drinks] I must be off. Probably it is all nonsense, anyway.
Good-bye.

He goes toward the house. SONIA takes his arm and goes with him.

SONIA. When are you coming to see us again?

ASTROFF. I can't say.

SONIA. In a month?

ASTROFF and SONIA go into the house. HELENA and VOITSKI walk over to the
terrace.

HELENA. You have behaved shockingly again. Ivan, what sense was there
in teasing your mother and talking about _perpetuum mobile?_ And at
breakfast you quarreled with Alexander again. Really, your behaviour is
too petty.

VOITSKI. But if I hate him?

HELENA. You hate Alexander without reason; he is like every one else,
and no worse than you are.

VOITSKI. If you could only see your face, your gestures! Oh, how tedious
your life must be.

HELENA. It is tedious, yes, and dreary! You all abuse my husband and
look on me with compassion; you think, "Poor woman, she is married to
an old man." How well I understand your compassion! As Astroff said just
now, see how you thoughtlessly destroy the forests, so that there will
soon be none left. So you also destroy mankind, and soon fidelity and
purity and self-sacrifice will have vanished with the woods. Why cannot
you look calmly at a woman unless she is yours? Because, the doctor
was right, you are all possessed by a devil of destruction; you have no
mercy on the woods or the birds or on women or on one another.

VOITSKI. I don't like your philosophy.

HELENA. That doctor has a sensitive, weary face--an interesting face.
Sonia evidently likes him, and she is in love with him, and I can
understand it. This is the third time he has been here since I have
come, and I have not had a real talk with him yet or made much of him.
He thinks I am disagreeable. Do you know, Ivan, the reason you and I are
such friends? I think it is because we are both lonely and unfortunate.
Yes, unfortunate. Don't look at me in that way, I don't like it.

VOITSKI. How can I look at you otherwise when I love you? You are my
joy, my life, and my youth. I know that my chances of being loved in
return are infinitely small, do not exist, but I ask nothing of you.
Only let me look at you, listen to your voice--

HELENA. Hush, some one will overhear you.

[They go toward the house.]

VOITSKI. [Following her] Let me speak to you of my love, do not drive me
away, and this alone will be my greatest happiness!

HELENA. Ah! This is agony!

TELEGIN strikes the strings of his guitar and plays a polka. MME.
VOITSKAYA writes something on the leaves of her pamphlet.

The curtain falls.




ACT II

The dining-room of SEREBRAKOFF'S house. It is night. The tapping of the
WATCHMAN'S rattle is heard in the garden. SEREBRAKOFF is dozing in an
arm-chair by an open window and HELENA is sitting beside him, also half
asleep.

SEREBRAKOFF. [Rousing himself] Who is here? Is it you, Sonia?

HELENA. It is I.

SEREBRAKOFF. Oh, it is you, Nelly. This pain is intolerable.

HELENA. Your shawl has slipped down. [She wraps up his legs in the
shawl] Let me shut the window.

SEREBRAKOFF. No, leave it open; I am suffocating. I dreamt just now that
my left leg belonged to some one else, and it hurt so that I woke. I
don't believe this is gout, it is more like rheumatism. What time is it?

HELENA. Half past twelve. [A pause.]

SEREBRAKOFF. I want you to look for Batushka's works in the library
to-morrow. I think we have him.

HELENA. What is that?

SEREBRAKOFF. Look for Batushka to-morrow morning; we used to have him, I
remember. Why do I find it so hard to breathe?

HELENA. You are tired; this is the second night you have had no sleep.

SEREBRAKOFF. They say that Turgenieff got angina of the heart from gout.
I am afraid I am getting angina too. Oh, damn this horrible, accursed
old age! Ever since I have been old I have been hateful to myself, and I
am sure, hateful to you all as well.

HELENA. You speak as if we were to blame for your being old.

SEREBRAKOFF. I am more hateful to you than to any one.

HELENA gets up and walks away from him, sitting down at a distance.

SEREBRAKOFF. You are quite right, of course. I am not an idiot; I can
understand you. You are young and healthy and beautiful, and longing for
life, and I am an old dotard, almost a dead man already. Don't I know
it? Of course I see that it is foolish for me to live so long, but wait!
I shall soon set you all free. My life cannot drag on much longer.

HELENA. You are overtaxing my powers of endurance. Be quiet, for God's
sake!

SEREBRAKOFF. It appears that, thanks to me, everybody's power of
endurance is being overtaxed; everybody is miserable, only I am
blissfully triumphant. Oh, yes, of course!

HELENA. Be quiet! You are torturing me.

SEREBRAKOFF. I torture everybody. Of course.

HELENA. [Weeping] This is unbearable! Tell me, what is it you want me to
do?

SEREBRAKOFF. Nothing.

HELENA. Then be quiet, please.

SEREBRAKOFF. It is funny that everybody listens to Ivan and his old
idiot of a mother, but the moment I open my lips you all begin to feel
ill-treated. You can't even stand the sound of my voice. Even if I am
hateful, even if I am a selfish tyrant, haven't I the right to be one
at my age? Haven't I deserved it? Haven't I, I ask you, the right to be
respected, now that I am old?

HELENA. No one is disputing your rights. [The window slams in the wind]
The wind is rising, I must shut the window. [She shuts it] We shall have
rain in a moment. Your rights have never been questioned by anybody.

The WATCHMAN in the garden sounds his rattle.

SEREBRAKOFF. I have spent my life working in the interests of learning.
I am used to my library and the lecture hall and to the esteem and
admiration of my colleagues. Now I suddenly find myself plunged in this
wilderness, condemned to see the same stupid people from morning till
night and listen to their futile conversation. I want to live; I long
for success and fame and the stir of the world, and here I am in exile!
Oh, it is dreadful to spend every moment grieving for the lost past, to
see the success of others and sit here with nothing to do but to fear
death. I cannot stand it! It is more than I can bear. And you will not
even forgive me for being old!

HELENA. Wait, have patience; I shall be old myself in four or five
years.

SONIA comes in.

SONIA. Father, you sent for Dr. Astroff, and now when he comes you
refuse to see him. It is not nice to give a man so much trouble for
nothing.

SEREBRAKOFF. What do I care about your Astroff? He understands medicine
about as well as I understand astronomy.

SONIA. We can't send for the whole medical faculty, can we, to treat
your gout?

SEREBRAKOFF. I won't talk to that madman!

SONIA. Do as you please. It's all the same to me. [She sits down.]

SEREBRAKOFF. What time is it?

HELENA. One o'clock.

SEREBRAKOFF. It is stifling in here. Sonia, hand me that bottle on the
table.

SONIA. Here it is. [She hands him a bottle of medicine.]

SEREBRAKOFF. [Crossly] No, not that one! Can't you understand me? Can't
I ask you to do a thing?

SONIA. Please don't be captious with me. Some people may like it, but
you must spare me, if you please, because I don't. Besides, I haven't
the time; we are cutting the hay to-morrow and I must get up early.

VOITSKI comes in dressed in a long gown and carrying a candle.

VOITSKI. A thunderstorm is coming up. [The lightning flashes] There it
is! Go to bed, Helena and Sonia. I have come to take your place.

SEREBRAKOFF. [Frightened] No, n-o, no! Don't leave me alone with him!
Oh, don't. He will begin to lecture me.

VOITSKI. But you must give them a little rest. They have not slept for
two nights.

SEREBRAKOFF. Then let them go to bed, but you go away too! Thank you. I
implore you to go. For the sake of our former friendship do not protest
against going. We will talk some other time----

VOITSKI. Our former friendship! Our former----

SONIA. Hush, Uncle Vanya!

SEREBRAKOFF. [To his wife] My darling, don't leave me alone with him. He
will begin to lecture me.

VOITSKI. This is ridiculous.

MARINA comes in carrying a candle.

SONIA. You must go to bed, nurse, it is late.

MARINA. I haven't cleared away the tea things. Can't go to bed yet.

SEREBRAKOFF. No one can go to bed. They are all worn out, only I enjoy
perfect happiness.

MARINA. [Goes up to SEREBRAKOFF and speaks tenderly] What's the
matter, master? Does it hurt? My own legs are aching too, oh, so badly.
[Arranges his shawl about his legs] You have had this illness such a
long time. Sonia's dead mother used to stay awake with you too, and wear
herself out for you. She loved you dearly. [A pause] Old people want to
be pitied as much as young ones, but nobody cares about them somehow.
[She kisses SEREBRAKOFF'S shoulder] Come, master, let me give you some
linden-tea and warm your poor feet for you. I shall pray to God for you.

SEREBRAKOFF. [Touched] Let us go, Marina.

MARINA. My own feet are aching so badly, oh, so badly! [She and SONIA
lead SEREBRAKOFF out] Sonia's mother used to wear herself out with
sorrow and weeping. You were still little and foolish then, Sonia. Come,
come, master.

SEREBRAKOFF, SONIA and MARINA go out.

HELENA. I am absolutely exhausted by him, and can hardly stand.

VOITSKI. You are exhausted by him, and I am exhausted by my own self. I
have not slept for three nights.

HELENA. Something is wrong in this house. Your mother hates everything
but her pamphlets and the professor; the professor is vexed, he won't
trust me, and fears you; Sonia is angry with her father, and with me,
and hasn't spoken to me for two weeks; I am at the end of my strength,
and have come near bursting into tears at least twenty times to-day.
Something is wrong in this house.

VOITSKI. Leave speculating alone.

HELENA. You are cultured and intelligent, Ivan, and you surely
understand that the world is not destroyed by villains and
conflagrations, but by hate and malice and all this spiteful tattling.
It is your duty to make peace, and not to growl at everything.

VOITSKI. Help me first to make peace with myself. My darling! [Seizes
her hand.]

HELENA. Let go! [She drags her hand away] Go away!

VOITSKI. Soon the rain will be over, and all nature will sigh and awake
refreshed. Only I am not refreshed by the storm. Day and night the
thought haunts me like a fiend, that my life is lost for ever. My past
does not count, because I frittered it away on trifles, and the present
has so terribly miscarried! What shall I do with my life and my love?
What is to become of them? This wonderful feeling of mine will be wasted
and lost as a ray of sunlight is lost that falls into a dark chasm, and
my life will go with it.

HELENA. I am as it were benumbed when you speak to me of your love, and
I don't know how to answer you. Forgive me, I have nothing to say to
you. [She tries to go out] Good-night!

VOITSKI. [Barring the way] If you only knew how I am tortured by the
thought that beside me in this house is another life that is being lost
forever--it is yours! What are you waiting for? What accursed philosophy
stands in your way? Oh, understand, understand----

HELENA. [Looking at him intently] Ivan, you are drunk!

VOITSKI. Perhaps. Perhaps.

HELENA. Where is the doctor?

VOITSKI. In there, spending the night with me. Perhaps I am drunk,
perhaps I am; nothing is impossible.

HELENA. Have you just been drinking together? Why do you do that?

VOITSKI. Because in that way I get a taste of life. Let me do it,
Helena!

HELENA. You never used to drink, and you never used to talk so much. Go
to bed, I am tired of you.

VOITSKI. [Falling on his knees before her] My sweetheart, my beautiful
one----

HELENA. [Angrily] Leave me alone! Really, this has become too
disagreeable.

HELENA goes out. A pause.

VOITSKI [Alone] She is gone! I met her first ten years ago, at her
sister's house, when she was seventeen and I was thirty-seven. Why did I
not fall in love with her then and propose to her? It would have been so
easy! And now she would have been my wife. Yes, we would both have been
waked to-night by the thunderstorm, and she would have been frightened,
but I would have held her in my arms and whispered: "Don't be afraid!
I am here." Oh, enchanting dream, so sweet that I laugh to think of it.
[He laughs] But my God! My head reels! Why am I so old? Why won't
she understand me? I hate all that rhetoric of hers, that morality of
indolence, that absurd talk about the destruction of the world----[A
pause] Oh, how I have been deceived! For years I have worshipped that
miserable gout-ridden professor. Sonia and I have squeezed this estate
dry for his sake. We have bartered our butter and curds and peas like
misers, and have never kept a morsel for ourselves, so that we could
scrape enough pennies together to send to him. I was proud of him and
of his learning; I received all his words and writings as inspired, and
now? Now he has retired, and what is the total of his life? A blank! He
is absolutely unknown, and his fame has burst like a soap-bubble. I have
been deceived; I see that now, basely deceived.

ASTROFF comes in. He has his coat on, but is without his waistcoat or
collar, and is slightly drunk. TELEGIN follows him, carrying a guitar.

ASTROFF. Play!

TELEGIN. But every one is asleep.

ASTROFF. Play!

TELEGIN begins to play softly.

ASTROFF. Are you alone here? No women about? [Sings with his arms
akimbo.]

   "The hut is cold, the fire is dead;
    Where shall the master lay his head?"

The thunderstorm woke me. It was a heavy shower. What time is it?

VOITSKI. The devil only knows.

ASTROFF. I thought I heard Helena's voice.

VOITSKI. She was here a moment ago.

ASTROFF. What a beautiful woman! [Looking at the medicine bottles on
the table] Medicine, is it? What a variety we have; prescriptions from
Moscow, from Kharkoff, from Tula! Why, he has been pestering all the
towns of Russia with his gout! Is he ill, or simply shamming?

VOITSKI. He is really ill.

ASTROFF. What is the matter with you to-night? You seem sad. Is it
because you are sorry for the professor?

VOITSKI. Leave me alone.

ASTROFF. Or in love with the professor's wife?

VOITSKI. She is my friend.

ASTROFF. Already?

VOITSKI. What do you mean by "already"?

ASTROFF. A woman can only become a man's friend after having first been
his acquaintance and then his beloved--then she becomes his friend.

VOITSKI. What vulgar philosophy!

ASTROFF. What do you mean? Yes, I must confess I am getting vulgar, but
then, you see, I am drunk. I usually only drink like this once a month.
At such times my audacity and temerity know no bounds. I feel capable
of anything. I attempt the most difficult operations and do them
magnificently. The most brilliant plans for the future take shape in
my head. I am no longer a poor fool of a doctor, but mankind's greatest
benefactor. I evolve my own system of philosophy and all of you seem to
crawl at my feet like so many insects or microbes. [To TELEGIN] Play,
Waffles!

TELEGIN. My dear boy, I would with all my heart, but do listen to
reason; everybody in the house is asleep.

ASTROFF. Play!

TELEGIN plays softly.

ASTROFF. I want a drink. Come, we still have some brandy left. And then,
as soon as it is day, you will come home with me. [He sees SONIA, who
comes in at that moment.]

ASTROFF. I beg your pardon, I have no collar on.

[He goes out quickly, followed by TELEGIN.]

SONIA. Uncle Vanya, you and the doctor have been drinking! The good
fellows have been getting together! It is all very well for him, he has
always done it, but why do you follow his example? It looks dreadfully
at your age.

VOITSKI. Age has nothing to do with it. When real life is wanting one
must create an illusion. It is better than nothing.

SONIA. Our hay is all cut and rotting in these daily rains, and here you
are busy creating illusions! You have given up the farm altogether.
I have done all the work alone until I am at the end of my
strength--[Frightened] Uncle! Your eyes are full of tears!

VOITSKI. Tears? Nonsense, there are no tears in my eyes. You looked at
me then just as your dead mother used to, my darling--[He eagerly kisses
her face and hands] My sister, my dearest sister, where are you now? Ah,
if you only knew, if you only knew!

SONIA. If she only knew what, Uncle?

VOITSKI. My heart is bursting. It is awful. No matter, though. I must
go. [He goes out.]

SONIA. [Knocks at the door] Dr. Astroff! Are you awake? Please come here
for a minute.

ASTROFF. [Behind the door] In a moment.

He appears in a few seconds. He has put on his collar and waistcoat.

ASTROFF. What do you want?

SONIA. Drink as much as you please yourself if you don't find it
revolting, but I implore you not to let my uncle do it. It is bad for
him.

ASTROFF. Very well; we won't drink any more. I am going home at once.
That is settled. It will be dawn by the time the horses are harnessed.

SONIA. It is still raining; wait till morning.

ASTROFF. The storm is blowing over. This is only the edge of it. I must
go. And please don't ask me to come and see your father any more. I tell
him he has gout, and he says it is rheumatism. I tell him to lie down,
and he sits up. To-day he refused to see me at all.

SONIA. He has been spoilt. [She looks in the sideboard] Won't you have a
bite to eat?

ASTROFF. Yes, please. I believe I will.

SONIA. I love to eat at night. I am sure we shall find something in
here. They say that he has made a great many conquests in his life, and
that the women have spoiled him. Here is some cheese for you.

[They stand eating by the sideboard.]

ASTROFF. I haven't eaten anything to-day. Your father has a very
difficult nature. [He takes a bottle out of the sideboard] May I? [He
pours himself a glass of vodka] We are alone here, and I can speak
frankly. Do you know, I could not stand living in this house for even a
month? This atmosphere would stifle me. There is your father, entirely
absorbed in his books, and his gout; there is your Uncle Vanya with his
hypochondria, your grandmother, and finally, your step-mother--

SONIA. What about her?

ASTROFF. A human being should be entirely beautiful: the face, the
clothes, the mind, the thoughts. Your step-mother is, of course,
beautiful to look at, but don't you see? She does nothing but sleep
and eat and walk and bewitch us, and that is all. She has no
responsibilities, everything is done for her--am I not right? And an
idle life can never be a pure one. [A pause] However, I may be judging
her too severely. Like your Uncle Vanya, I am discontented, and so we
are both grumblers.

SONIA. Aren't you satisfied with life?

ASTROFF. I like life as life, but I hate and despise it in a little
Russian country village, and as far as my own personal life goes, by
heaven! there is absolutely no redeeming feature about it. Haven't you
noticed if you are riding through a dark wood at night and see a little
light shining ahead, how you forget your fatigue and the darkness and
the sharp twigs that whip your face? I work, that you know--as no one
else in the country works. Fate beats me on without rest; at times I
suffer unendurably and I see no light ahead. I have no hope; I do not
like people. It is long since I have loved any one.

SONIA. You love no one?

ASTROFF. Not a soul. I only feel a sort of tenderness for your old nurse
for old-times' sake. The peasants are all alike; they are stupid and
live in dirt, and the educated people are hard to get along with. One
gets tired of them. All our good friends are petty and shallow and see
no farther than their own noses; in one word, they are dull. Those that
have brains are hysterical, devoured with a mania for self-analysis.
They whine, they hate, they pick faults everywhere with unhealthy
sharpness. They sneak up to me sideways, look at me out of a corner of
the eye, and say: "That man is a lunatic," "That man is a wind-bag." Or,
if they don't know what else to label me with, they say I am strange. I
like the woods; that is strange. I don't eat meat; that is strange, too.
Simple, natural relations between man and man or man and nature do not
exist. [He tries to go out; SONIA prevents him.]

SONIA. I beg you, I implore you, not to drink any more!

ASTROFF. Why not?

SONIA. It is so unworthy of you. You are well-bred, your voice is sweet,
you are even--more than any one I know--handsome. Why do you want to
resemble the common people that drink and play cards? Oh, don't, I beg
you! You always say that people do not create anything, but only destroy
what heaven has given them. Why, oh, why, do you destroy yourself? Oh,
don't, I implore you not to! I entreat you!

ASTROFF. [Gives her his hand] I won't drink any more.

SONIA. Promise me.

ASTROFF. I give you my word of honour.

SONIA. [Squeezing his hand] Thank you.

ASTROFF. I have done with it. You see, I am perfectly sober again, and
so I shall stay till the end of my life. [He looks his watch] But, as
I was saying, life holds nothing for me; my race is run. I am old, I
am tired, I am trivial; my sensibilities are dead. I could never attach
myself to any one again. I love no one, and never shall! Beauty alone
has the power to touch me still. I am deeply moved by it. Helena could
turn my head in a day if she wanted to, but that is not love, that is
not affection--

[He shudders and covers his face with his hands.]

SONIA. What is it?

ASTROFF. Nothing. During Lent one of my patients died under chloroform.

SONIA. It is time to forget that. [A pause] Tell me, doctor, if I had a
friend or a younger sister, and if you knew that she, well--loved you,
what would you do?

ASTROFF. [Shrugging his shoulders] I don't know. I don't think I should
do anything. I should make her understand that I could not return her
love--however, my mind is not bothered about those things now. I must
start at once if I am ever to get off. Good-bye, my dear girl. At this
rate we shall stand here talking till morning. [He shakes hands with
her] I shall go out through the sitting-room, because I am afraid your
uncle might detain me. [He goes out.]

SONIA. [Alone] Not a word! His heart and soul are still locked from me,
and yet for some reason I am strangely happy. I wonder why? [She laughs
with pleasure] I told him that he was well-bred and handsome and that
his voice was sweet. Was that a mistake? I can still feel his voice
vibrating in the air; it caresses me. [Wringing her hands] Oh! how
terrible it is to be plain! I am plain, I know it. As I came out of
church last Sunday I overheard a woman say, "She is a dear, noble girl,
but what a pity she is so ugly!" So ugly!

HELENA comes in and throws open the window.

HELENA. The storm is over. What delicious air! [A pause] Where is the
doctor?

SONIA. He has gone. [A pause.]

HELENA. Sonia!

SONIA. Yes?

HELENA. How much longer are you going to sulk at me? We have not hurt
each other. Why not be friends? We have had enough of this.

SONIA. I myself--[She embraces HELENA] Let us make peace.

HELENA. With all my heart. [They are both moved.]

SONIA. Has papa gone to bed?

HELENA. No, he is sitting up in the drawing-room. Heaven knows what
reason you and I had for not speaking to each other for weeks. [Sees the
open sideboard] Who left the sideboard open?

SONIA. Dr. Astroff has just had supper.

HELENA. There is some wine. Let us seal our friendship.

SONIA. Yes, let us.

HELENA. Out of one glass. [She fills a wine-glass] So, we are friends,
are we?

SONIA. Yes. [They drink and kiss each other] I have long wanted to make
friends, but somehow, I was ashamed to. [She weeps.]

HELENA. Why are you crying?

SONIA. I don't know. It is nothing.

HELENA. There, there, don't cry. [She weeps] Silly! Now I am crying
too. [A pause] You are angry with me because I seem to have married your
father for his money, but don't believe the gossip you hear. I swear to
you I married him for love. I was fascinated by his fame and learning. I
know now that it was not real love, but it seemed real at the time. I
am innocent, and yet your clever, suspicious eyes have been punishing me
for an imaginary crime ever since my marriage.

SONIA. Peace, peace! Let us forget the past.

HELENA. You must not look so at people. It is not becoming to you. You
must trust people, or life becomes impossible.

SONIA. Tell me truly, as a friend, are you happy?

HELENA. Truly, no.

SONIA. I knew it. One more question: do you wish your husband were
young?

HELENA. What a child you are! Of course I do. Go on, ask something else.

SONIA. Do you like the doctor?

HELENA. Yes, very much indeed.

SONIA. [Laughing] I have a stupid face, haven't I? He has just gone out,
and his voice is still in my ears; I hear his step; I see his face in
the dark window. Let me say all I have in my heart! But no, I cannot
speak of it so loudly. I am ashamed. Come to my room and let me tell you
there. I seem foolish to you, don't I? Talk to me of him.

HELENA. What can I say?

SONIA. He is clever. He can do everything. He can cure the sick, and
plant woods.

HELENA. It is not a question of medicine and woods, my dear, he is a man
of genius. Do you know what that means? It means he is brave, profound,
and of clear insight. He plants a tree and his mind travels a thousand
years into the future, and he sees visions of the happiness of the human
race. People like him are rare and should be loved. What if he does
drink and act roughly at times? A man of genius cannot be a saint in
Russia. There he lives, cut off from the world by cold and storm and
endless roads of bottomless mud, surrounded by a rough people who are
crushed by poverty and disease, his life one continuous struggle, with
never a day's respite; how can a man live like that for forty years and
keep himself sober and unspotted? [Kissing SONIA] I wish you happiness
with all my heart; you deserve it. [She gets up] As for me, I am a
worthless, futile woman. I have always been futile; in music, in love,
in my husband's house--in a word, in everything. When you come to think
of it, Sonia, I am really very, very unhappy. [Walks excitedly up and
down] Happiness can never exist for me in this world. Never. Why do you
laugh?

SONIA. [Laughing and covering her face with her hands] I am so happy, so
happy!

HELENA. I want to hear music. I might play a little.

SONIA. Oh, do, do! [She embraces her] I could not possibly go to sleep
now. Do play!

HELENA. Yes, I will. Your father is still awake. Music irritates him
when he is ill, but if he says I may, then I shall play a little. Go,
Sonia, and ask him.

SONIA. Very well.

[She goes out. The WATCHMAN'S rattle is heard in the garden.]

HELENA. It is long since I have heard music. And now, I shall sit and
play, and weep like a fool. [Speaking out of the window] Is that you
rattling out there, Ephim?

VOICE OF THE WATCHMAN. It is I.

HELENA. Don't make such a noise. Your master is ill.

VOICE OF THE WATCHMAN. I am going away this minute. [Whistles a tune.]

SONIA. [Comes back] He says, no.

The curtain falls.




ACT III

The drawing-room of SEREBRAKOFF'S house. There are three doors: one to
the right, one to the left, and one in the centre of the room. VOITSKI
and SONIA are sitting down. HELENA is walking up and down, absorbed in
thought.

VOITSKI. We were asked by the professor to be here at one o'clock.
[Looks at his watch] It is now a quarter to one. It seems he has some
communication to make to the world.

HELENA. Probably a matter of business.

VOITSKI. He never had any business. He writes twaddle, grumbles, and
eats his heart out with jealousy; that's all he does.

SONIA. [Reproachfully] Uncle!

VOITSKI. All right. I beg your pardon. [He points to HELENA] Look at
her. Wandering up and down from sheer idleness. A sweet picture, really.

HELENA. I wonder you are not bored, droning on in the same key from
morning till night. [Despairingly] I am dying of this tedium. What shall
I do?

SONIA. [Shrugging her shoulders] There is plenty to do if you would.

HELENA. For instance?

SONIA. You could help run this place, teach the children, care for the
sick--isn't that enough? Before you and papa came, Uncle Vanya and I
used to go to market ourselves to deal in flour.

HELENA. I don't know anything about such things, and besides, they don't
interest me. It is only in novels that women go out and teach and heal
the peasants; how can I suddenly begin to do it?

SONIA. How can you live here and not do it? Wait awhile, you will get
used to it all. [Embraces her] Don't be sad, dearest. [Laughing] You
feel miserable and restless, and can't seem to fit into this life, and
your restlessness is catching. Look at Uncle Vanya, he does nothing now
but haunt you like a shadow, and I have left my work to-day to come here
and talk with you. I am getting lazy, and don't want to go on with it.
Dr. Astroff hardly ever used to come here; it was all we could do to
persuade him to visit us once a month, and now he has abandoned his
forestry and his practice, and comes every day. You must be a witch.

VOITSKI. Why should you languish here? Come, my dearest, my beauty, be
sensible! The blood of a Nixey runs in your veins. Oh, won't you let
yourself be one? Give your nature the reins for once in your life; fall
head over ears in love with some other water sprite and plunge down head
first into a deep pool, so that the Herr Professor and all of us may
have our hands free again.

HELENA. [Angrily] Leave me alone! How cruel you are! [She tries to go
out.]

VOITSKI. [Preventing her] There, there, my beauty, I apologise. [He
kisses her hand] Forgive me.

HELENA. Confess that you would try the patience of an angel.

VOITSKI. As a peace offering I am going to fetch some flowers which I
picked for you this morning: some autumn roses, beautiful, sorrowful
roses. [He goes out.]

SONIA. Autumn roses, beautiful, sorrowful roses!

[She and HELENA stand looking out of the window.]

HELENA. September already! How shall we live through the long winter
here? [A pause] Where is the doctor?

SONIA. He is writing in Uncle Vanya's room. I am glad Uncle Vanya has
gone out, I want to talk to you about something.

HELENA. About what?

SONIA. About what?

[She lays her head on HELENA'S breast.]

HELENA. [Stroking her hair] There, there, that will do. Don't, Sonia.

SONIA. I am ugly!

HELENA. You have lovely hair.

SONIA. Don't say that! [She turns to look at herself in the glass] No,
when a woman is ugly they always say she has beautiful hair or eyes. I
have loved him now for six years, I have loved him more than one loves
one's mother. I seem to hear him beside me every moment of the day. I
feel the pressure of his hand on mine. If I look up, I seem to see him
coming, and as you see, I run to you to talk of him. He is here every
day now, but he never looks at me, he does not notice my presence. It
is agony. I have absolutely no hope, no, no hope. Oh, my God! Give me
strength to endure. I prayed all last night. I often go up to him and
speak to him and look into his eyes. My pride is gone. I am not mistress
of myself. Yesterday I told Uncle Vanya I couldn't control myself, and
all the servants know it. Every one knows that I love him.

HELENA. Does he?

SONIA. No, he never notices me.

HELENA. [Thoughtfully] He is a strange man. Listen, Sonia, will you
allow me to speak to him? I shall be careful, only hint. [A pause]
Really, to be in uncertainty all these years! Let me do it!

SONIA nods an affirmative.

HELENA. Splendid! It will be easy to find out whether he loves you or
not. Don't be ashamed, sweetheart, don't worry. I shall be careful; he
will not notice a thing. We only want to find out whether it is yes or
no, don't we? [A pause] And if it is no, then he must keep away from
here, is that so?

SONIA nods.

HELENA. It will be easier not to see him any more. We won't put off the
examination an instant. He said he had a sketch to show me. Go and tell
him at once that I want to see him.

SONIA. [In great excitement] Will you tell me the whole truth?

HELENA. Of course I will. I am sure that no matter what it is, it will
be easier for you to bear than this uncertainty. Trust to me, dearest.

SONIA. Yes, yes. I shall say that you want to see his sketch. [She
starts out, but stops near the door and looks back] No, it is better not
to know--and yet--there may be hope.

HELENA. What do you say?

SONIA. Nothing. [She goes out.]

HELENA. [Alone] There is no greater sorrow than to know another's secret
when you cannot help them. [In deep thought] He is obviously not in love
with her, but why shouldn't he marry her? She is not pretty, but she
is so clever and pure and good, she would make a splendid wife for a
country doctor of his years. [A pause] I can understand how the poor
child feels. She lives here in this desperate loneliness with no one
around her except these colourless shadows that go mooning about talking
nonsense and knowing nothing except that they eat, drink, and sleep.
Among them appears from time to time this Dr. Astroff, so different, so
handsome, so interesting, so charming. It is like seeing the moon
rise on a dark night. Oh, to surrender oneself to his embrace! To lose
oneself in his arms! I am a little in love with him myself! Yes, I am
lonely without him, and when I think of him I smile. That Uncle Vanya
says I have the blood of a Nixey in my veins: "Give rein to your nature
for once in your life!" Perhaps it is right that I should. Oh, to be
free as a bird, to fly away from all your sleepy faces and your talk and
forget that you have existed at all! But I am a coward, I am afraid; my
conscience torments me. He comes here every day now. I can guess why,
and feel guilty already; I should like to fall on my knees at Sonia's
feet and beg her forgiveness, and weep.

ASTROFF comes in carrying a portfolio.

ASTROFF. How do you do? [Shakes hands with her] Do you want to see my
sketch?

HELENA. Yes, you promised to show me what you had been doing. Have you
time now?

ASTROFF. Of course I have!

He lays the portfolio on the table, takes out the sketch and fastens it
to the table with thumb-tacks.

ASTROFF. Where were you born?

HELENA. [Helping him] In St. Petersburg.

ASTROFF. And educated?

HELENA. At the Conservatory there.

ASTROFF. You don't find this life very interesting, I dare say?

HELENA. Oh, why not? It is true I don't know the country very well, but
I have read a great deal about it.

ASTROFF. I have my own desk there in Ivan's room. When I am absolutely
too exhausted to go on I drop everything and rush over here to forget
myself in this work for an hour or two. Ivan and Miss Sonia sit rattling
at their counting-boards, the cricket chirps, and I sit beside them and
paint, feeling warm and peaceful. But I don't permit myself this luxury
very often, only once a month. [Pointing to the picture] Look there!
That is a map of our country as it was fifty years ago. The green tints,
both dark and light, represent forests. Half the map, as you see, is
covered with it. Where the green is striped with red the forests were
inhabited by elk and wild goats. Here on this lake, lived great flocks
of swans and geese and ducks; as the old men say, there was a power of
birds of every kind. Now they have vanished like a cloud. Beside the
hamlets and villages, you see, I have dotted down here and there the
various settlements, farms, hermit's caves, and water-mills. This
country carried a great many cattle and horses, as you can see by the
quantity of blue paint. For instance, see how thickly it lies in this
part; there were great herds of them here, an average of three horses to
every house. [A pause] Now, look lower down. This is the country as it
was twenty-five years ago. Only a third of the map is green now with
forests. There are no goats left and no elk. The blue paint is lighter,
and so on, and so on. Now we come to the third part; our country as it
appears to-day. We still see spots of green, but not much. The elk, the
swans, the black-cock have disappeared. It is, on the whole, the picture
of a regular and slow decline which it will evidently only take about
ten or fifteen more years to complete. You may perhaps object that it
is the march of progress, that the old order must give place to the new,
and you might be right if roads had been run through these ruined woods,
or if factories and schools had taken their place. The people then would
have become better educated and healthier and richer, but as it is, we
have nothing of the sort. We have the same swamps and mosquitoes;
the same disease and want; the typhoid, the diphtheria, the burning
villages. We are confronted by the degradation of our country, brought
on by the fierce struggle for existence of the human race. It is the
consequence of the ignorance and unconsciousness of starving, shivering,
sick humanity that, to save its children, instinctively snatches
at everything that can warm it and still its hunger. So it destroys
everything it can lay its hands on, without a thought for the morrow.
And almost everything has gone, and nothing has been created to take its
place. [Coldly] But I see by your face that I am not interesting you.

HELENA. I know so little about such things!

ASTROFF. There is nothing to know. It simply isn't interesting, that's
all.

HELENA. Frankly, my thoughts were elsewhere. Forgive me! I want to
submit you to a little examination, but I am embarrassed and don't know
how to begin.

ASTROFF. An examination?

HELENA. Yes, but quite an innocent one. Sit down. [They sit down] It is
about a certain young girl I know. Let us discuss it like honest people,
like friends, and then forget what has passed between us, shall we?

ASTROFF. Very well.

HELENA. It is about my step-daughter, Sonia. Do you like her?

ASTROFF. Yes, I respect her.

HELENA. Do you like her--as a woman?

ASTROFF. [Slowly] No.

HELENA. One more word, and that will be the last. You have not noticed
anything?

ASTROFF. No, nothing.

HELENA. [Taking his hand] You do not love her. I see that in your eyes.
She is suffering. You must realise that, and not come here any more.

ASTROFF. My sun has set, yes, and then I haven't the time. [Shrugging
his shoulders] Where shall I find time for such things? [He is
embarrassed.]

HELENA. Bah! What an unpleasant conversation! I am as out of breath as
if I had been running three miles uphill. Thank heaven, that is over!
Now let us forget everything as if nothing had been said. You are
sensible. You understand. [A pause] I am actually blushing.

ASTROFF. If you had spoken a month ago I might perhaps have
considered it, but now--[He shrugs his shoulders] Of course, if she is
suffering--but I cannot understand why you had to put me through this
examination. [He searches her face with his eyes, and shakes his finger
at her] Oho, you are wily!

HELENA. What does this mean?

ASTROFF. [Laughing] You are a wily one! I admit that Sonia is suffering,
but what does this examination of yours mean? [He prevents her from
retorting, and goes on quickly] Please don't put on such a look of
surprise; you know perfectly well why I come here every day. Yes, you
know perfectly why and for whose sake I come! Oh, my sweet tigress!
don't look at me in that way; I am an old bird!

HELENA. [Perplexed] A tigress? I don't understand you.

ASTROFF. Beautiful, sleek tigress, you must have your victims! For a
whole month I have done nothing but seek you eagerly. I have thrown over
everything for you, and you love to see it. Now then, I am sure you knew
all this without putting me through your examination. [Crossing his arms
and bowing his head] I surrender. Here you have me--now, eat me.

HELENA. You have gone mad!

ASTROFF. You are afraid!

HELENA. I am a better and stronger woman than you think me. Good-bye.
[She tries to leave the room.]

ASTROFF. Why good-bye? Don't say good-bye, don't waste words. Oh, how
lovely you are--what hands! [He kisses her hands.]

HELENA. Enough of this! [She frees her hands] Leave the room! You have
forgotten yourself.

ASTROFF. Tell me, tell me, where can we meet to-morrow? [He puts his arm
around her] Don't you see that we must meet, that it is inevitable?

He kisses her. VOITSKI comes in carrying a bunch of roses, and stops in
the doorway.

HELENA. [Without seeing VOITSKI] Have pity! Leave me, [lays her head on
ASTROFF'S shoulder] Don't! [She tries to break away from him.]

ASTROFF. [Holding her by the waist] Be in the forest tomorrow at two
o'clock. Will you? Will you?

HELENA. [Sees VOITSKI] Let me go! [Goes to the window deeply
embarrassed] This is appalling!

VOITSKI. [Throws the flowers on a chair, and speaks in great excitement,
wiping his face with his handkerchief] Nothing--yes, yes, nothing.

ASTROFF. The weather is fine to-day, my dear Ivan; the morning was
overcast and looked like rain, but now the sun is shining again.
Honestly, we have had a very fine autumn, and the wheat is looking
fairly well. [Puts his map back into the portfolio] But the days are
growing short.

HELENA. [Goes quickly up to VOITSKI] You must do your best; you must use
all your power to get my husband and myself away from here to-day! Do
you hear? I say, this very day!

VOITSKI. [Wiping his face] Oh! Ah! Oh! All right! I--Helena, I saw
everything!

HELENA. [In great agitation] Do you hear me? I must leave here this very
day!

SEREBRAKOFF, SONIA, MARINA, and TELEGIN come in.

TELEGIN. I am not very well myself, your Excellency. I have been limping
for two days, and my head--

SEREBRAKOFF. Where are the others? I hate this house. It is a regular
labyrinth. Every one is always scattered through the twenty-six enormous
rooms; one never can find a soul. [Rings] Ask my wife and Madame
Voitskaya to come here!

HELENA. I am here already.

SEREBRAKOFF. Please, all of you, sit down.

SONIA. [Goes up to HELENA and asks anxiously] What did he say?

HELENA. I'll tell you later.

SONIA. You are moved. [looking quickly and inquiringly into her face] I
understand; he said he would not come here any more. [A pause] Tell me,
did he?

HELENA nods.

SEREBRAKOFF. [To TELEGIN] One can, after all, become reconciled to being
an invalid, but not to this country life. The ways of it stick in my
throat and I feel exactly as if I had been whirled off the earth and
landed on a strange planet. Please be seated, ladies and gentlemen.
Sonia! [SONIA does not hear. She is standing with her head bowed sadly
forward on her breast] Sonia! [A pause] She does not hear me. [To
MARINA] Sit down too, nurse. [MARINA sits down and begins to knit her
stocking] I crave your indulgence, ladies and gentlemen; hang your ears,
if I may say so, on the peg of attention. [He laughs.]

VOITSKI. [Agitated] Perhaps you do not need me--may I be excused?

SEREBRAKOFF. No, you are needed now more than any one.

VOITSKI. What is it you want of me?

SEREBRAKOFF. You--but what are you angry about? If it is anything I have
done, I ask you to forgive me.

VOITSKI. Oh, drop that and come to business; what do you want?

MME. VOITSKAYA comes in.

SEREBRAKOFF. Here is mother. Ladies and gentlemen, I shall begin. I
have asked you to assemble here, my friends, in order to discuss a very
important matter. I want to ask you for your assistance and advice, and
knowing your unfailing amiability I think I can count on both. I am a
book-worm and a scholar, and am unfamiliar with practical affairs. I
cannot, I find, dispense with the help of well-informed people such as
you, Ivan, and you, Telegin, and you, mother. The truth is, _manet omnes
una nox,_ that is to say, our lives are in the hands of God, and as I
am old and ill, I realise that the time has come for me to dispose of
my property in regard to the interests of my family. My life is nearly
over, and I am not thinking of myself, but I have a young wife and
daughter. [A pause] I cannot continue to live in the country; we were
not made for country life, and yet we cannot afford to live in town on
the income derived from this estate. We might sell the woods, but that
would be an expedient we could not resort to every year. We must find
some means of guaranteeing to ourselves a certain more or less fixed
yearly income. With this object in view, a plan has occurred to me which
I now have the honour of presenting to you for your consideration. I
shall only give you a rough outline, avoiding all details. Our estate
does not pay on an average more than two per cent on the money invested
in it. I propose to sell it. If we then invest our capital in bonds,
it will earn us four to five per cent, and we should probably have a
surplus over of several thousand roubles, with which we could buy a
summer cottage in Finland--

VOITSKI. Hold on! Repeat what you just said; I don't think I heard you
quite right.

SEREBRAKOFF. I said we would invest the money in bonds and buy a cottage
in Finland with the surplus.

VOITSKI. No, not Finland--you said something else.

SEREBRAKOFF. I propose to sell this place.

VOITSKI. Aha! That was it! So you are going to sell the place? Splendid.
The idea is a rich one. And what do you propose to do with my old mother
and me and with Sonia here?

SEREBRAKOFF. That will be decided in due time. We can't do everything at
once.

VOITSKI. Wait! It is clear that until this moment I have never had a
grain of sense in my head. I have always been stupid enough to think
that the estate belonged to Sonia. My father bought it as a wedding
present for my sister, and I foolishly imagined that as our laws were
made for Russians and not Turks, my sister's estate would come down to
her child.

SEREBRAKOFF. Of course it is Sonia's. Has any one denied it? I don't
want to sell it without Sonia's consent; on the contrary, what I am
doing is for Sonia's good.

VOITSKI. This is absolutely incomprehensible. Either I have gone mad
or--or--

MME. VOITSKAYA. Jean, don't contradict Alexander. Trust to him; he knows
better than we do what is right and what is wrong.

VOITSKI. I shan't. Give me some water. [He drinks] Go ahead! Say
anything you please--anything!

SEREBRAKOFF. I can't imagine why you are so upset. I don't pretend
that my scheme is an ideal one, and if you all object to it I shall not
insist. [A pause.]

TELEGIN. [With embarrassment] I not only nourish feelings of respect
toward learning, your Excellency, but I am also drawn to it by family
ties. My brother Gregory's wife's brother, whom you may know; his name
is Constantine Lakedemonoff, and he used to be a magistrate--

VOITSKI. Stop, Waffles. This is business; wait a bit, we will talk of
that later. [To SEREBRAKOFF] There now, ask him what he thinks; this
estate was bought from his uncle.

SEREBRAKOFF. Ah! Why should I ask questions? What good would it do?

VOITSKI. The price was ninety-five thousand roubles. My father paid
seventy and left a debt of twenty-five. Now listen! This place could
never have been bought had I not renounced my inheritance in favour of
my sister, whom I deeply loved--and what is more, I worked for ten years
like an ox, and paid off the debt.

SEREBRAKOFF. I regret ever having started this conversation.

VOITSKI. Thanks entirely to my own personal efforts, the place is
entirely clear of debts, and now, when I have grown old, you want to
throw me out, neck and crop!

SEREBRAKOFF. I can't imagine what you are driving at.

VOITSKI. For twenty-five years I have managed this place, and have sent
you the returns from it like the most honest of servants, and you have
never given me one single word of thanks for my work, not one--neither
in my youth nor now. You allowed me a meagre salary of five hundred
roubles a year, a beggar's pittance, and have never even thought of
adding a rouble to it.

SEREBRAKOFF. What did I know about such things, Ivan? I am not a
practical man and don't understand them. You might have helped yourself
to all you wanted.

VOITSKI. Yes, why did I not steal? Don't you all despise me for not
stealing, when it would have been only justice? And I should not now
have been a beggar!

MME. VOITSKAYA. [Sternly] Jean!

TELEGIN. [Agitated] Vanya, old man, don't talk in that way. Why spoil
such pleasant relations? [He embraces him] Do stop!

VOITSKI. For twenty-five years I have been sitting here with my mother
like a mole in a burrow. Our every thought and hope was yours and yours
only. By day we talked with pride of you and your work, and spoke your
name with veneration; our nights we wasted reading the books and papers
which my soul now loathes.

TELEGIN. Don't, Vanya, don't. I can't stand it.

SEREBRAKOFF. [Wrathfully] What under heaven do you want, anyway?

VOITSKI. We used to think of you as almost superhuman, but now the
scales have fallen from my eyes and I see you as you are! You write on
art without knowing anything about it. Those books of yours which I used
to admire are not worth one copper kopeck. You are a hoax!

SEREBRAKOFF. Can't any one make him stop? I am going!

HELENA. Ivan, I command you to stop this instant! Do you hear me?

VOITSKI. I refuse! [SEREBRAKOFF tries to get out of the room, but
VOITSKI bars the door] Wait! I have not done yet! You have wrecked my
life. I have never lived. My best years have gone for nothing, have been
ruined, thanks to you. You are my most bitter enemy!

TELEGIN. I can't stand it; I can't stand it. I am going. [He goes out in
great excitement.]

SEREBRAKOFF. But what do you want? What earthly right have you to use
such language to me? Ruination! If this estate is yours, then take it,
and let me be ruined!

HELENA. I am going away out of this hell this minute. [Shrieks] This is
too much!

VOITSKI. My life has been a failure. I am clever and brave and strong.
If I had lived a normal life I might have become another Schopenhauer
or Dostoieffski. I am losing my head! I am going crazy! Mother, I am in
despair! Oh, mother!

MME. VOITSKAYA. [Sternly] Listen, Alexander!

SONIA falls on her knees beside the nurse and nestles against her.

SONIA. Oh, nurse, nurse!

VOITSKI. Mother! What shall I do? But no, don't speak! I know what to
do. [To SEREBRAKOFF] And you will understand me!

He goes out through the door in the centre of the room and MME.
VOITSKAYA follows him.

SEREBRAKOFF. Tell me, what on earth is the matter? Take this lunatic out
of my sight! I cannot possibly live under the same roof with him. His
room [He points to the centre door] is almost next door to mine. Let him
take himself off into the village or into the wing of the house, or I
shall leave here at once. I cannot stay in the same house with him.

HELENA. [To her husband] We are leaving to-day; we must get ready at
once for our departure.

SEREBRAKOFF. What a perfectly dreadful man!

SONIA. [On her knees beside the nurse and turning to her father. She
speaks with emotion] You must be kind to us, papa. Uncle Vanya and I
are so unhappy! [Controlling her despair] Have pity on us. Remember how
Uncle Vanya and Granny used to copy and translate your books for you
every night--every, every night. Uncle Vanya has toiled without rest;
he would never spend a penny on us, we sent it all to you. We have not
eaten the bread of idleness. I am not saying this as I should like to,
but you must understand us, papa, you must be merciful to us.

HELENA. [Very excited, to her husband] For heaven's sake, Alexander, go
and have a talk with him--explain!

SEREBRAKOFF. Very well, I shall have a talk with him, but I won't
apologise for a thing. I am not angry with him, but you must confess
that his behaviour has been strange, to say the least. Excuse me, I
shall go to him.

[He goes out through the centre door.]

HELENA. Be gentle with him; try to quiet him. [She follows him out.]

SONIA. [Nestling nearer to MARINA] Nurse, oh, nurse!

MARINA. It's all right, my baby. When the geese have cackled they will
be still again. First they cackle and then they stop.

SONIA. Nurse!

MARINA. You are trembling all over, as if you were freezing. There,
there, little orphan baby, God is merciful. A little linden-tea, and it
will all pass away. Don't cry, my sweetest. [Looking angrily at the door
in the centre of the room] See, the geese have all gone now. The devil
take them!

A shot is heard. HELENA screams behind the scenes. SONIA shudders.

MARINA. Bang! What's that?

SEREBRAKOFF. [Comes in reeling with terror] Hold him! hold him! He has
gone mad!

HELENA and VOITSKI are seen struggling in the doorway.

HELENA. [Trying to wrest the revolver from him] Give it to me; give it
to me, I tell you!

VOITSKI. Let me go, Helena, let me go! [He frees himself and rushes in,
looking everywhere for SEREBRAKOFF] Where is he? Ah, there he is! [He
shoots at him. A pause] I didn't get him? I missed again? [Furiously]
Damnation! Damnation! To hell with him!

He flings the revolver on the floor, and drops helpless into a chair.
SEREBRAKOFF stands as if stupefied. HELENA leans against the wall,
almost fainting.

HELENA. Take me away! Take me away! I can't stay here--I can't!

VOITSKI. [In despair] Oh, what shall I do? What shall I do?

SONIA. [Softly] Oh, nurse, nurse!

The curtain falls.




ACT IV

VOITSKI'S bedroom, which is also his office. A table stands near
the window; on it are ledgers, letter scales, and papers of every
description. Near by stands a smaller table belonging to ASTROFF, with
his paints and drawing materials. On the wall hangs a cage containing a
starling. There is also a map of Africa on the wall, obviously of no use
to anybody. There is a large sofa covered with buckram. A door to the
left leads into an inner room; one to the right leads into the front
hall, and before this door lies a mat for the peasants with their muddy
boots to stand on. It is an autumn evening. The silence is profound.
TELEGIN and MARINA are sitting facing one another, winding wool.

TELEGIN. Be quick, Marina, or we shall be called away to say good-bye
before you have finished. The carriage has already been ordered.

MARINA. [Trying to wind more quickly] I am a little tired.

TELEGIN. They are going to Kharkoff to live.

MARINA. They do well to go.

TELEGIN. They have been frightened. The professor's wife won't stay here
an hour longer. "If we are going at all, let's be off," says she, "we
shall go to Kharkoff and look about us, and then we can send for our
things." They are travelling light. It seems, Marina, that fate has
decreed for them not to live here.

MARINA. And quite rightly. What a storm they have just raised! It was
shameful!

TELEGIN. It was indeed. The scene was worthy of the brush of Aibazofski.

MARINA. I wish I'd never laid eyes on them. [A pause] Now we shall have
things as they were again: tea at eight, dinner at one, and supper in
the evening; everything in order as decent folks, as Christians like to
have it. [Sighs] It is a long time since I have eaten noodles.

TELEGIN. Yes, we haven't had noodles for ages. [A pause] Not for ages.
As I was going through the village this morning, Marina, one of the
shop-keepers called after me, "Hi! you hanger-on!" I felt it bitterly.

MARINA. Don't pay the least attention to them, master; we are all
dependents on God. You and Sonia and all of us. Every one must work, no
one can sit idle. Where is Sonia?

TELEGIN. In the garden with the doctor, looking for Ivan. They fear he
may lay violent hands on himself.

MARINA. Where is his pistol?

TELEGIN. [Whispers] I hid it in the cellar.

VOITSKI and ASTROFF come in.

VOITSKI. Leave me alone! [To MARINA and TELEGIN] Go away! Go away and
leave me to myself, if but for an hour. I won't have you watching me
like this!

TELEGIN. Yes, yes, Vanya. [He goes out on tiptoe.]

MARINA. The gander cackles; ho! ho! ho!

[She gathers up her wool and goes out.]

VOITSKI. Leave me by myself!

ASTROFF. I would, with the greatest pleasure. I ought to have gone long
ago, but I shan't leave you until you have returned what you took from
me.

VOITSKI. I took nothing from you.

ASTROFF. I am not jesting, don't detain me, I really must go.

VOITSKI. I took nothing of yours.

ASTROFF. You didn't? Very well, I shall have to wait a little longer,
and then you will have to forgive me if I resort to force. We shall have
to bind you and search you. I mean what I say.

VOITSKI. Do as you please. [A pause] Oh, to make such a fool of myself!
To shoot twice and miss him both times! I shall never forgive myself.

ASTROFF. When the impulse came to shoot, it would have been as well had
you put a bullet through your own head.

VOITSKI. [Shrugging his shoulders] Strange! I attempted murder, and am
not going to be arrested or brought to trial. That means they think
me mad. [With a bitter laugh] Me! I am mad, and those who hide their
worthlessness, their dullness, their crying heartlessness behind a
professor's mask, are sane! Those who marry old men and then deceive
them under the noses of all, are sane! I saw you kiss her; I saw you in
each other's arms!

ASTROFF. Yes, sir, I did kiss her; so there. [He puts his thumb to his
nose.]

VOITSKI. [His eyes on the door] No, it is the earth that is mad, because
she still bears us on her breast.

ASTROFF. That is nonsense.

VOITSKI. Well? Am I not a madman, and therefore irresponsible? Haven't I
the right to talk nonsense?

ASTROFF. This is a farce! You are not mad; you are simply a ridiculous
fool. I used to think every fool was out of his senses, but now I
see that lack of sense is a man's normal state, and you are perfectly
normal.

VOITSKI. [Covers his face with his hands] Oh! If you knew how ashamed
I am! These piercing pangs of shame are like nothing on earth. [In an
agonised voice] I can't endure them! [He leans against the table] What
can I do? What can I do?

ASTROFF. Nothing.

VOITSKI. You must tell me something! Oh, my God! I am forty-seven years
old. I may live to sixty; I still have thirteen years before me; an
eternity! How shall I be able to endure life for thirteen years?
What shall I do? How can I fill them? Oh, don't you see? [He presses
ASTROFF'S hand convulsively] Don't you see, if only I could live the
rest of my life in some new way! If I could only wake some still, bright
morning and feel that life had begun again; that the past was forgotten
and had vanished like smoke. [He weeps] Oh, to begin life anew! Tell me,
tell me how to begin.

ASTROFF. [Crossly] What nonsense! What sort of a new life can you and I
look forward to? We can have no hope.

VOITSKI. None?

ASTROFF. None. Of that I am convinced.

VOITSKI. Tell me what to do. [He puts his hand to his heart] I feel such
a burning pain here.

ASTROFF. [Shouts angrily] Stop! [Then, more gently] It may be that
posterity, which will despise us for our blind and stupid lives, will
find some road to happiness; but we--you and I--have but one hope, the
hope that we may be visited by visions, perhaps by pleasant ones, as we
lie resting in our graves. [Sighing] Yes, brother, there were only two
respectable, intelligent men in this county, you and I. Ten years or so
of this life of ours, this miserable life, have sucked us under, and we
have become as contemptible and petty as the rest. But don't try to talk
me out of my purpose! Give me what you took from me, will you?

VOITSKI. I took nothing from you.

ASTROFF. You took a little bottle of morphine out of my medicine-case.
[A pause] Listen! If you are positively determined to make an end
to yourself, go into the woods and shoot yourself there. Give up the
morphine, or there will be a lot of talk and guesswork; people will
think I gave it to you. I don't fancy having to perform a post-mortem on
you. Do you think I should find it interesting?

SONIA comes in.

VOITSKI. Leave me alone.

ASTROFF. [To SONIA] Sonia, your uncle has stolen a bottle of morphine
out of my medicine-case and won't give it up. Tell him that his
behaviour is--well, unwise. I haven't time, I must be going.

SONIA. Uncle Vanya, did you take the morphine?

ASTROFF. Yes, he took it. [A pause] I am absolutely sure.

SONIA. Give it up! Why do you want to frighten us? [Tenderly] Give it
up, Uncle Vanya! My misfortune is perhaps even greater than yours, but I
am not plunged in despair. I endure my sorrow, and shall endure it until
my life comes to a natural end. You must endure yours, too. [A pause]
Give it up! Dear, darling Uncle Vanya. Give it up! [She weeps] You are
so good, I am sure you will have pity on us and give it up. You must
endure your sorrow, Uncle Vanya; you must endure it.

VOITSKI takes a bottle from the drawer of the table and hands it to
ASTROFF.

VOITSKI. There it is! [To SONIA] And now, we must get to work at once;
we must do something, or else I shall not be able to endure it.

SONIA. Yes, yes, to work! As soon as we have seen them off we shall
go to work. [She nervously straightens out the papers on the table]
Everything is in a muddle!

ASTROFF. [Putting the bottle in his case, which he straps together] Now
I can be off.

HELENA comes in.

HELENA. Are you here, Ivan? We are starting in a moment. Go to
Alexander, he wants to speak to you.

SONIA. Go, Uncle Vanya. [She takes VOITSKI 'S arm] Come, you and papa
must make peace; that is absolutely necessary.

SONIA and VOITSKI go out.

HELENA. I am going away. [She gives ASTROFF her hand] Good-bye.

ASTROFF. So soon?

HELENA. The carriage is waiting.

ASTROFF. Good-bye.

HELENA. You promised me you would go away yourself to-day.

ASTROFF. I have not forgotten. I am going at once. [A pause] Were you
frightened? Was it so terrible?

HELENA. Yes.

ASTROFF. Couldn't you stay? Couldn't you? To-morrow--in the forest--

HELENA. No. It is all settled, and that is why I can look you so bravely
in the face. Our departure is fixed. One thing I must ask of you: don't
think too badly of me; I should like you to respect me.

ASTROFF. Ah! [With an impatient gesture] Stay, I implore you! Confess
that there is nothing for you to do in this world. You have no object
in life; there is nothing to occupy your attention, and sooner or later
your feelings must master you. It is inevitable. It would be better if
it happened not in Kharkoff or in Kursk, but here, in nature's lap.
It would then at least be poetical, even beautiful. Here you have the
forests, the houses half in ruins that Turgenieff writes of.

HELENA. How comical you are! I am angry with you and yet I shall always
remember you with pleasure. You are interesting and original. You and
I will never meet again, and so I shall tell you--why should I conceal
it?--that I am just a little in love with you. Come, one more last
pressure of our hands, and then let us part good friends. Let us not
bear each other any ill will.

ASTROFF. [Pressing her hand] Yes, go. [Thoughtfully] You seem to be
sincere and good, and yet there is something strangely disquieting about
all your personality. No sooner did you arrive here with your husband
than every one whom you found busy and actively creating something was
forced to drop his work and give himself up for the whole summer to
your husband's gout and yourself. You and he have infected us with your
idleness. I have been swept off my feet; I have not put my hand to
a thing for weeks, during which sickness has been running its course
unchecked among the people, and the peasants have been pasturing their
cattle in my woods and young plantations. Go where you will, you and
your husband will always carry destruction in your train. I am joking of
course, and yet I am strangely sure that had you stayed here we should
have been overtaken by the most immense desolation. I would have gone
to my ruin, and you--you would not have prospered. So go! E finita la
comedia!

HELENA. [Snatching a pencil off ASTROFF'S table, and hiding it with a
quick movement] I shall take this pencil for memory!

ASTROFF. How strange it is. We meet, and then suddenly it seems that
we must part forever. That is the way in this world. As long as we are
alone, before Uncle Vanya comes in with a bouquet--allow me--to kiss you
good-bye--may I? [He kisses her on the cheek] So! Splendid!

HELENA. I wish you every happiness. [She glances about her] For once
in my life, I shall! and scorn the consequences! [She kisses him
impetuously, and they quickly part] I must go.

ASTROFF. Yes, go. If the carriage is there, then start at once. [They
stand listening.]

ASTROFF. E finita!

VOITSKI, SEREBRAKOFF, MME. VOITSKAYA with her book, TELEGIN, and SONIA
come in.

SEREBRAKOFF. [To VOITSKI] Shame on him who bears malice for the past. I
have gone through so much in the last few hours that I feel capable of
writing a whole treatise on the conduct of life for the instruction
of posterity. I gladly accept your apology, and myself ask your
forgiveness. [He kisses VOITSKI three times.]

HELENA embraces SONIA.

SEREBRAKOFF. [Kissing MME. VOITSKAYA'S hand] Mother!

MME. VOITSKAYA. [Kissing him] Have your picture taken, Alexander, and
send me one. You know how dear you are to me.

TELEGIN. Good-bye, your Excellency. Don't forget us.

SEREBRAKOFF. [Kissing his daughter] Good-bye, good-bye all. [Shaking
hands with ASTROFF] Many thanks for your pleasant company. I have a deep
regard for your opinions and your enthusiasm, but let me, as an old man,
give one word of advice at parting: do something, my friend! Work! Do
something! [They all bow] Good luck to you all. [He goes out followed by
MME. VOITSKAYA and SONIA.]

VOITSKI [Kissing HELENA'S hand fervently] Good-bye--forgive me. I shall
never see you again!

HELENA. [Touched] Good-bye, dear boy.

She lightly kisses his head as he bends over her hand, and goes out.

ASTROFF. Tell them to bring my carriage around too, Waffles.

TELEGIN. All right, old man.

ASTROFF and VOITSKI are left behind alone. ASTROFF collects his paints
and drawing materials on the table and packs them away in a box.

ASTROFF. Why don't you go to see them off?

VOITSKI. Let them go! I--I can't go out there. I feel too sad. I must go
to work on something at once. To work! To work!

He rummages through his papers on the table. A pause. The tinkling of
bells is heard as the horses trot away.

ASTROFF. They have gone! The professor, I suppose, is glad to go. He
couldn't be tempted back now by a fortune.

MARINA comes in.

MARINA. They have gone. [She sits down in an arm-chair and knits her
stocking.]

SONIA comes in wiping her eyes.

SONIA. They have gone. God be with them. [To her uncle] And now, Uncle
Vanya, let us do something!

VOITSKI. To work! To work!

SONIA. It is long, long, since you and I have sat together at this
table. [She lights a lamp on the table] No ink! [She takes the inkstand
to the cupboard and fills it from an ink-bottle] How sad it is to see
them go!

MME. VOITSKAYA comes slowly in.

MME. VOITSKAYA. They have gone.

She sits down and at once becomes absorbed in her book. SONIA sits down
at the table and looks through an account book.

SONIA. First, Uncle Vanya, let us write up the accounts. They are in a
dreadful state. Come, begin. You take one and I will take the other.

VOITSKI. In account with [They sit silently writing.]

MARINA. [Yawning] The sand-man has come.

ASTROFF. How still it is. Their pens scratch, the cricket sings; it is
so warm and comfortable. I hate to go. [The tinkling of bells is heard.]

ASTROFF. My carriage has come. There now remains but to say good-bye to
you, my friends, and to my table here, and then--away! [He puts the map
into the portfolio.]

MARINA. Don't hurry away; sit a little longer with us.

ASTROFF. Impossible.

VOITSKI. [Writing] And carry forward from the old debt two
seventy-five--

WORKMAN comes in.

WORKMAN. Your carriage is waiting, sir.

ASTROFF. All right. [He hands the WORKMAN his medicine-case, portfolio,
and box] Look out, don't crush the portfolio!

WORKMAN. Very well, sir.

SONIA. When shall we see you again?

ASTROFF. Hardly before next summer. Probably not this winter, though, of
course, if anything should happen you will let me know. [He shakes
hands with them] Thank you for your kindness, for your hospitality, for
everything! [He goes up to MARINA and kisses her head] Good-bye, old
nurse!

MARINA. Are you going without your tea?

ASTROFF. I don't want any, nurse.

MARINA. Won't you have a drop of vodka?

ASTROFF. [Hesitatingly] Yes, I might.

MARINA goes out.

ASTROFF. [After a pause] My off-wheeler has gone lame for some reason. I
noticed it yesterday when Peter was taking him to water.

VOITSKI. You should have him re-shod.

ASTROFF. I shall have to go around by the blacksmith's on my way home.
It can't be avoided. [He stands looking up at the map of Africa hanging
on the wall] I suppose it is roasting hot in Africa now.

VOITSKI. Yes, I suppose it is.

MARINA comes back carrying a tray on which are a glass of vodka and a
piece of bread.

MARINA. Help yourself.

ASTROFF drinks

MARINA. To your good health! [She bows deeply] Eat your bread with it.

ASTROFF. No, I like it so. And now, good-bye. [To MARINA] You needn't
come out to see me off, nurse.

He goes out. SONIA follows him with a candle to light him to the
carriage. MARINA sits down in her armchair.

VOITSKI. [Writing] On the 2d of February, twenty pounds of butter; on
the 16th, twenty pounds of butter again. Buckwheat flour--[A pause.
Bells are heard tinkling.]

MARINA. He has gone. [A pause.]

SONIA comes in and sets the candle stick on the table.

SONIA. He has gone.

VOITSKI. [Adding and writing] Total, fifteen--twenty-five--

SONIA sits down and begins to write.

[Yawning] Oh, ho! The Lord have mercy.

TELEGIN comes in on tiptoe, sits down near the door, and begins to tune
his guitar.

VOITSKI. [To SONIA, stroking her hair] Oh, my child, I am miserable; if
you only knew how miserable I am!

SONIA. What can we do? We must live our lives. [A pause] Yes, we shall
live, Uncle Vanya. We shall live through the long procession of days
before us, and through the long evenings; we shall patiently bear the
trials that fate imposes on us; we shall work for others without rest,
both now and when we are old; and when our last hour comes we shall
meet it humbly, and there, beyond the grave, we shall say that we have
suffered and wept, that our life was bitter, and God will have pity on
us. Ah, then dear, dear Uncle, we shall see that bright and beautiful
life; we shall rejoice and look back upon our sorrow here; a tender
smile--and--we shall rest. I have faith, Uncle, fervent, passionate
faith. [SONIA kneels down before her uncle and lays her head on his
hands. She speaks in a weary voice] We shall rest. [TELEGIN plays softly
on the guitar] We shall rest. We shall hear the angels. We shall see
heaven shining like a jewel. We shall see all evil and all our pain sink
away in the great compassion that shall enfold the world. Our life will
be as peaceful and tender and sweet as a caress. I have faith; I have
faith. [She wipes away her tears] My poor, poor Uncle Vanya, you are
crying! [Weeping] You have never known what happiness was, but wait,
Uncle Vanya, wait! We shall rest. [She embraces him] We shall rest. [The
WATCHMAN'S rattle is heard in the garden; TELEGIN plays softly; MME.
VOITSKAYA writes something on the margin of her pamphlet; MARINA knits
her stocking] We shall rest.

ACT I

[In PROSOROV’S house. A sitting-room with pillars; behind is seen a
large dining-room. It is midday, the sun is shining brightly outside. In
the dining-room the table is being laid for lunch.]

[OLGA, in the regulation blue dress of a teacher at a girl’s high
school, is walking about correcting exercise books; MASHA, in a black
dress, with a hat on her knees, sits and reads a book; IRINA, in white,
stands about, with a thoughtful expression.]

OLGA. It’s just a year since father died last May the fifth, on your
name-day, Irina. It was very cold then, and snowing. I thought I would
never survive it, and you were in a dead faint. And now a year has
gone by and we are already thinking about it without pain, and you are
wearing a white dress and your face is happy. [Clock strikes twelve] And
the clock struck just the same way then. [Pause] I remember that there
was music at the funeral, and they fired a volley in the cemetery. He
was a general in command of a brigade but there were few people present.
Of course, it was raining then, raining hard, and snowing.

IRINA. Why think about it!

[BARON TUZENBACH, CHEBUTIKIN and SOLENI appear by the table in the
dining-room, behind the pillars.]

OLGA. It’s so warm to-day that we can keep the windows open, though the
birches are not yet in flower. Father was put in command of a brigade,
and he rode out of Moscow with us eleven years ago. I remember perfectly
that it was early in May and that everything in Moscow was flowering
then. It was warm too, everything was bathed in sunshine. Eleven years
have gone, and I remember everything as if we rode out only yesterday.
Oh, God! When I awoke this morning and saw all the light and the spring,
joy entered my heart, and I longed passionately to go home.

CHEBUTIKIN. Will you take a bet on it?

TUZENBACH. Oh, nonsense.

[MASHA, lost in a reverie over her book, whistles softly.]

OLGA. Don’t whistle, Masha. How can you! [Pause] I’m always having
headaches from having to go to the High School every day and then teach
till evening. Strange thoughts come to me, as if I were already an old
woman. And really, during these four years that I have been working
here, I have been feeling as if every day my strength and youth have
been squeezed out of me, drop by drop. And only one desire grows and
gains in strength...

IRINA. To go away to Moscow. To sell the house, drop everything here,
and go to Moscow...

OLGA. Yes! To Moscow, and as soon as possible.

[CHEBUTIKIN and TUZENBACH laugh.]

IRINA. I expect Andrey will become a professor, but still, he won’t want
to live here. Only poor Masha must go on living here.

OLGA. Masha can come to Moscow every year, for the whole summer.

[MASHA is whistling gently.]

IRINA. Everything will be arranged, please God. [Looks out of the
window] It’s nice out to-day. I don’t know why I’m so happy: I
remembered this morning that it was my name-day, and I suddenly felt
glad and remembered my childhood, when mother was still with us. What
beautiful thoughts I had, what thoughts!

OLGA. You’re all radiance to-day, I’ve never seen you look so lovely.
And Masha is pretty, too. Andrey wouldn’t be bad-looking, if he wasn’t
so stout; it does spoil his appearance. But I’ve grown old and very
thin, I suppose it’s because I get angry with the girls at school.
To-day I’m free. I’m at home. I haven’t got a headache, and I feel
younger than I was yesterday. I’m only twenty-eight.... All’s well, God
is everywhere, but it seems to me that if only I were married and could
stay at home all day, it would be even better. [Pause] I should love my
husband.

TUZENBACH. [To SOLENI] I’m tired of listening to the rot you talk.
[Entering the sitting-room] I forgot to say that Vershinin, our new
lieutenant-colonel of artillery, is coming to see us to-day. [Sits down
to the piano.]

OLGA. That’s good. I’m glad.

IRINA. Is he old?

TUZENBACH. Oh, no. Forty or forty-five, at the very outside. [Plays
softly] He seems rather a good sort. He’s certainly no fool, only he
likes to hear himself speak.

IRINA. Is he interesting?

TUZENBACH. Oh, he’s all right, but there’s his wife, his mother-in-law,
and two daughters. This is his second wife. He pays calls and tells
everybody that he’s got a wife and two daughters. He’ll tell you so
here. The wife isn’t all there, she does her hair like a flapper and
gushes extremely. She talks philosophy and tries to commit suicide every
now and again, apparently in order to annoy her husband. I should have
left her long ago, but he bears up patiently, and just grumbles.

SOLENI. [Enters with CHEBUTIKIN from the dining-room] With one hand I
can only lift fifty-four pounds, but with both hands I can lift 180,
or even 200 pounds. From this I conclude that two men are not twice as
strong as one, but three times, perhaps even more....

CHEBUTIKIN. [Reads a newspaper as he walks] If your hair is coming
out... take an ounce of naphthaline and hail a bottle of spirit...
dissolve and use daily.... [Makes a note in his pocket diary] When
found make a note of! Not that I want it though.... [Crosses it out] It
doesn’t matter.

IRINA. Ivan Romanovitch, dear Ivan Romanovitch!

CHEBUTIKIN. What does my own little girl want?

IRINA. Ivan Romanovitch, dear Ivan Romanovitch! I feel as if I were
sailing under the broad blue sky with great white birds around me. Why
is that? Why?

CHEBUTIKIN. [Kisses her hands, tenderly] My white bird....

IRINA. When I woke up to-day and got up and dressed myself, I suddenly
began to feel as if everything in this life was open to me, and that I
knew how I must live. Dear Ivan Romanovitch, I know everything. A man
must work, toil in the sweat of his brow, whoever he may be, for that is
the meaning and object of his life, his happiness, his enthusiasm. How
fine it is to be a workman who gets up at daybreak and breaks stones in
the street, or a shepherd, or a schoolmaster, who teaches children, or
an engine-driver on the railway.... My God, let alone a man, it’s better
to be an ox, or just a horse, so long as it can work, than a young woman
who wakes up at twelve o’clock, has her coffee in bed, and then spends
two hours dressing.... Oh it’s awful! Sometimes when it’s hot, your
thirst can be just as tiresome as my need for work. And if I don’t get
up early in future and work, Ivan Romanovitch, then you may refuse me
your friendship.

CHEBUTIKIN. [Tenderly] I’ll refuse, I’ll refuse....

OLGA. Father used to make us get up at seven. Now Irina wakes at seven
and lies and meditates about something till nine at least. And she looks
so serious! [Laughs.]

IRINA. You’re so used to seeing me as a little girl that it seems queer
to you when my face is serious. I’m twenty!

TUZENBACH. How well I can understand that craving for work, oh God! I’ve
never worked once in my life. I was born in Petersburg, a chilly, lazy
place, in a family which never knew what work or worry meant. I remember
that when I used to come home from my regiment, a footman used to
have to pull off my boots while I fidgeted and my mother looked on in
adoration and wondered why other people didn’t see me in the same light.
They shielded me from work; but only just in time! A new age is dawning,
the people are marching on us all, a powerful, health-giving storm is
gathering, it is drawing near, soon it will be upon us and it will drive
away laziness, indifference, the prejudice against labour, and rotten
dullness from our society. I shall work, and in twenty-five or thirty
years, every man will have to work. Every one!

CHEBUTIKIN. I shan’t work.

TUZENBACH. You don’t matter.

SOLENI. In twenty-five years’ time, we shall all be dead, thank the
Lord. In two or three years’ time apoplexy will carry you off, or else
I’ll blow your brains out, my pet. [Takes a scent-bottle out of his
pocket and sprinkles his chest and hands.]

CHEBUTIKIN. [Laughs] It’s quite true, I never have worked. After I came
down from the university I never stirred a finger or opened a book, I
just read the papers.... [Takes another newspaper out of his pocket]
Here we are.... I’ve learnt from the papers that there used to be one,
Dobrolubov [Note: Dobroluboy (1836-81), in spite of the shortness of his
career, established himself as one of the classic literary critics
of Russia], for instance, but what he wrote--I don’t know... God only
knows.... [Somebody is heard tapping on the floor from below] There....
They’re calling me downstairs, somebody’s come to see me. I’ll be back
in a minute... won’t be long.... [Exit hurriedly, scratching his beard.]

IRINA. He’s up to something.

TUZENBACH. Yes, he looked so pleased as he went out that I’m pretty
certain he’ll bring you a present in a moment.

IRINA. How unpleasant!

OLGA. Yes, it’s awful. He’s always doing silly things.

MASHA.

        “There stands a green oak by the sea.
        And a chain of bright gold is around it...
        And a chain of bright gold is around it....”

[Gets up and sings softly.]

OLGA. You’re not very bright to-day, Masha. [MASHA sings, putting on her
hat] Where are you off to?

MASHA. Home.

IRINA. That’s odd....

TUZENBACH. On a name-day, too!

MASHA. It doesn’t matter. I’ll come in the evening. Good-bye, dear.
[Kisses MASHA] Many happy returns, though I’ve said it before. In the
old days when father was alive, every time we had a name-day, thirty or
forty officers used to come, and there was lots of noise and fun, and
to-day there’s only a man and a half, and it’s as quiet as a desert...
I’m off... I’ve got the hump to-day, and am not at all cheerful, so
don’t you mind me. [Laughs through her tears] We’ll have a talk later
on, but good-bye for the present, my dear; I’ll go somewhere.

IRINA. [Displeased] You are queer....

OLGA. [Crying] I understand you, Masha.

SOLENI. When a man talks philosophy, well, it is philosophy or at any
rate sophistry; but when a woman, or two women, talk philosophy--it’s
all my eye.

MASHA. What do you mean by that, you very awful man?

SOLENI. Oh, nothing. You came down on me before I could say... help!
[Pause.]

MASHA. [Angrily, to OLGA] Don’t cry!

[Enter ANFISA and FERAPONT with a cake.]

ANFISA. This way, my dear. Come in, your feet are clean. [To IRINA] From
the District Council, from Mihail Ivanitch Protopopov... a cake.

IRINA. Thank you. Please thank him. [Takes the cake.]

FERAPONT. What?

IRINA. [Louder] Please thank him.

OLGA. Give him a pie, nurse. Ferapont, go, she’ll give you a pie.

FERAPONT. What?

ANFISA. Come on, gran’fer, Ferapont Spiridonitch. Come on. [Exeunt.]

MASHA. I don’t like this Mihail Potapitch or Ivanitch, Protopopov. We
oughtn’t to invite him here.

IRINA. I never asked him.

MASHA. That’s all right.

[Enter CHEBUTIKIN followed by a soldier with a silver samovar; there is
a rumble of dissatisfied surprise.]

OLGA. [Covers her face with her hands] A samovar! That’s awful! [Exit
into the dining-room, to the table.]

IRINA. My dear Ivan Romanovitch, what are you doing!

TUZENBACH. [Laughs] I told you so!

MASHA. Ivan Romanovitch, you are simply shameless!

CHEBUTIKIN. My dear good girl, you are the only thing, and the dearest
thing I have in the world. I’ll soon be sixty. I’m an old man, a lonely
worthless old man. The only good thing in me is my love for you, and if
it hadn’t been for that, I would have been dead long ago.... [To IRINA]
My dear little girl, I’ve known you since the day of your birth, I’ve
carried you in my arms... I loved your dead mother....

MASHA. But your presents are so expensive!

CHEBUTIKIN. [Angrily, through his tears] Expensive presents.... You
really, are!... [To the orderly] Take the samovar in there.... [Teasing]
Expensive presents!

[The orderly goes into the dining-room with the samovar.]

ANFISA. [Enters and crosses stage] My dear, there’s a strange Colonel
come! He’s taken off his coat already. Children, he’s coming here. Irina
darling, you’ll be a nice and polite little girl, won’t you.... Should
have lunched a long time ago.... Oh, Lord.... [Exit.]

TUZENBACH. It must be Vershinin. [Enter VERSHININ] Lieutenant-Colonel
Vershinin!

VERSHININ. [To MASHA and IRINA] I have the honour to introduce myself,
my name is Vershinin. I am very glad indeed to be able to come at last.
How you’ve grown! Oh! oh!

IRINA. Please sit down. We’re very glad you’ve come.

VERSHININ. [Gaily] I am glad, very glad! But there are three sisters,
surely. I remember--three little girls. I forget your faces, but your
father, Colonel Prosorov, used to have three little girls, I remember
that perfectly, I saw them with my own eyes. How time does fly! Oh,
dear, how it flies!

TUZENBACH. Alexander Ignateyevitch comes from Moscow.

IRINA. From Moscow? Are you from Moscow?

VERSHININ. Yes, that’s so. Your father used to be in charge of a battery
there, and I was an officer in the same brigade. [To MASHA] I seem to
remember your face a little.

MASHA. I don’t remember you.

IRINA. Olga! Olga! [Shouts into the dining-room] Olga! Come along! [OLGA
enters from the dining-room] Lieutenant Colonel Vershinin comes from
Moscow, as it happens.

VERSHININ. I take it that you are Olga Sergeyevna, the eldest, and that
you are Maria... and you are Irina, the youngest....

OLGA. So you come from Moscow?

VERSHININ. Yes. I went to school in Moscow and began my service there; I
was there for a long time until at last I got my battery and moved over
here, as you see. I don’t really remember you, I only remember that
there used to be three sisters. I remember your father well; I have only
to shut my eyes to see him as he was. I used to come to your house in
Moscow....

OLGA. I used to think I remembered everybody, but...

VERSHININ. My name is Alexander Ignateyevitch.

IRINA. Alexander Ignateyevitch, you’ve come from Moscow. That is really
quite a surprise!

OLGA. We are going to live there, you see.

IRINA. We think we may be there this autumn. It’s our native town, we
were born there. In Old Basmanni Road.... [They both laugh for joy.]

MASHA. We’ve unexpectedly met a fellow countryman. [Briskly] I remember:
Do you remember, Olga, they used to speak at home of a “lovelorn Major.”
 You were only a Lieutenant then, and in love with somebody, but for some
reason they always called you a Major for fun.

VERSHININ. [Laughs] That’s it... the lovelorn Major, that’s got it!

MASHA. You only wore moustaches then. You have grown older! [Through her
tears] You have grown older!

VERSHININ. Yes, when they used to call me the lovelorn Major, I was
young and in love. I’ve grown out of both now.

OLGA. But you haven’t a single white hair yet. You’re older, but you’re
not yet old.

VERSHININ. I’m forty-two, anyway. Have you been away from Moscow long?

IRINA. Eleven years. What are you crying for, Masha, you little fool....
[Crying] And I’m crying too.

MASHA. It’s all right. And where did you live?

VERSHININ. Old Basmanni Road.

OLGA. Same as we.

VERSHININ. Once I used to live in German Street. That was when the Red
Barracks were my headquarters. There’s an ugly bridge in between, where
the water rushes underneath. One gets melancholy when one is alone
there. [Pause] Here the river is so wide and fine! It’s a splendid
river!

OLGA. Yes, but it’s so cold. It’s very cold here, and the midges....

VERSHININ. What are you saying! Here you’ve got such a fine healthy
Russian climate. You’ve a forest, a river... and birches. Dear, modest
birches, I like them more than any other tree. It’s good to live here.
Only it’s odd that the railway station should be thirteen miles away....
Nobody knows why.

SOLENI. I know why. [All look at him] Because if it was near it wouldn’t
be far off, and if it’s far off, it can’t be near. [An awkward pause.]

TUZENBACH. Funny man.

OLGA. Now I know who you are. I remember.

VERSHININ. I used to know your mother.

CHEBUTIKIN. She was a good woman, rest her soul.

IRINA. Mother is buried in Moscow.

OLGA. At the Novo-Devichi Cemetery.

MASHA. Do you know, I’m beginning to forget her face. We’ll be forgotten
in just the same way.

VERSHININ. Yes, they’ll forget us. It’s our fate, it can’t be helped. A
time will come when everything that seems serious, significant, or very
important to us will be forgotten, or considered trivial. [Pause] And
the curious thing is that we can’t possibly find out what will come to
be regarded as great and important, and what will be feeble, or silly.
Didn’t the discoveries of Copernicus, or Columbus, say, seem unnecessary
and ludicrous at first, while wasn’t it thought that some rubbish
written by a fool, held all the truth? And it may so happen that our
present existence, with which we are so satisfied, will in time appear
strange, inconvenient, stupid, unclean, perhaps even sinful....

TUZENBACH. Who knows? But on the other hand, they may call our life
noble and honour its memory. We’ve abolished torture and capital
punishment, we live in security, but how much suffering there is still!

SOLENI. [In a feeble voice] There, there.... The Baron will go without
his dinner if you only let him talk philosophy.

TUZENBACH. Vassili Vassilevitch, kindly leave me alone. [Changes his
chair] You’re very dull, you know.

SOLENI. [Feebly] There, there, there.

TUZENBACH. [To VERSHININ] The sufferings we see to-day--there are so
many of them!--still indicate a certain moral improvement in society.

VERSHININ. Yes, yes, of course.

CHEBUTIKIN. You said just now, Baron, that they may call our life noble;
but we are very petty.... [Stands up] See how little I am. [Violin
played behind.]

MASHA. That’s Andrey playing--our brother.

IRINA. He’s the learned member of the family. I expect he will be a
professor some day. Father was a soldier, but his son chose an academic
career for himself.

MASHA. That was father’s wish.

OLGA. We ragged him to-day. We think he’s a little in love.

IRINA. To a local lady. She will probably come here to-day.

MASHA. You should see the way she dresses! Quite prettily, quite
fashionably too, but so badly! Some queer bright yellow skirt with a
wretched little fringe and a red bodice. And such a complexion! Andrey
isn’t in love. After all he has taste, he’s simply making fun of us. I
heard yesterday that she was going to marry Protopopov, the chairman
of the Local Council. That would do her nicely.... [At the side door]
Andrey, come here! Just for a minute, dear! [Enter ANDREY.]

OLGA. My brother, Andrey Sergeyevitch.

VERSHININ. My name is Vershinin.

ANDREY. Mine is Prosorov. [Wipes his perspiring hands] You’ve come to
take charge of the battery?

OLGA. Just think, Alexander Ignateyevitch comes from Moscow.

ANDREY. That’s all right. Now my little sisters won’t give you any rest.

VERSHININ. I’ve already managed to bore your sisters.

IRINA. Just look what a nice little photograph frame Andrey gave me
to-day. [Shows it] He made it himself.

VERSHININ. [Looks at the frame and does not know what to say] Yes....
It’s a thing that...

IRINA. And he made that frame there, on the piano as well. [Andrey waves
his hand and walks away.]

OLGA. He’s got a degree, and plays the violin, and cuts all sorts of
things out of wood, and is really a domestic Admirable Crichton. Don’t
go away, Andrey! He’s got into a habit of always going away. Come here!

[MASHA and IRINA take his arms and laughingly lead him back.]

MASHA. Come on, come on!

ANDREY. Please leave me alone.

MASHA. You are funny. Alexander Ignateyevitch used to be called the
lovelorn Major, but he never minded.

VERSHININ. Not the least.

MASHA. I’d like to call you the lovelorn fiddler!

IRINA. Or the lovelorn professor!

OLGA. He’s in love! little Andrey is in love!

IRINA. [Applauds] Bravo, Bravo! Encore! Little Andrey is in love.

CHEBUTIKIN. [Goes up behind ANDREY and takes him round the waist with
both arms] Nature only brought us into the world that we should love!
[Roars with laughter, then sits down and reads a newspaper which he
takes out of his pocket.]

ANDREY. That’s enough, quite enough.... [Wipes his face] I couldn’t
sleep all night and now I can’t quite find my feet, so to speak. I read
until four o’clock, then tried to sleep, but nothing happened. I thought
about one thing and another, and then it dawned and the sun crawled into
my bedroom. This summer, while I’m here, I want to translate a book from
the English....

VERSHININ. Do you read English?

ANDREY. Yes father, rest his soul, educated us almost violently. It may
seem funny and silly, but it’s nevertheless true, that after his death
I began to fill out and get rounder, as if my body had had some great
pressure taken off it. Thanks to father, my sisters and I know French,
German, and English, and Irina knows Italian as well. But we paid dearly
for it all!

MASHA. A knowledge of three languages is an unnecessary luxury in this
town. It isn’t even a luxury but a sort of useless extra, like a sixth
finger. We know a lot too much.

VERSHININ. Well, I say! [Laughs] You know a lot too much! I don’t think
there can really be a town so dull and stupid as to have no place for
a clever, cultured person. Let us suppose even that among the hundred
thousand inhabitants of this backward and uneducated town, there are
only three persons like yourself. It stands to reason that you won’t be
able to conquer that dark mob around you; little by little as you grow
older you will be bound to give way and lose yourselves in this crowd of
a hundred thousand human beings; their life will suck you up in itself,
but still, you won’t disappear having influenced nobody; later on,
others like you will come, perhaps six of them, then twelve, and so on,
until at last your sort will be in the majority. In two or three hundred
years’ time life on this earth will be unimaginably beautiful and
wonderful. Mankind needs such a life, and if it is not ours to-day then
we must look ahead for it, wait, think, prepare for it. We must see and
know more than our fathers and grandfathers saw and knew. [Laughs] And
you complain that you know too much.

MASHA. [Takes off her hat] I’ll stay to lunch.

IRINA. [Sighs] Yes, all that ought to be written down.

[ANDREY has gone out quietly.]

TUZENBACH. You say that many years later on, life on this earth will
be beautiful and wonderful. That’s true. But to share in it now, even
though at a distance, we must prepare by work....

VERSHININ. [Gets up] Yes. What a lot of flowers you have. [Looks round]
It’s a beautiful flat. I envy you! I’ve spent my whole life in rooms
with two chairs, one sofa, and fires which always smoke. I’ve never had
flowers like these in my life.... [Rubs his hands] Well, well!

TUZENBACH. Yes, we must work. You are probably thinking to yourself:
the German lets himself go. But I assure you I’m a Russian, I can’t even
speak German. My father belonged to the Orthodox Church.... [Pause.]

VERSHININ. [Walks about the stage] I often wonder: suppose we could
begin life over again, knowing what we were doing? Suppose we could use
one life, already ended, as a sort of rough draft for another? I think
that every one of us would try, more than anything else, not to repeat
himself, at the very least he would rearrange his manner of life, he
would make sure of rooms like these, with flowers and light... I have
a wife and two daughters, my wife’s health is delicate and so on and so
on, and if I had to begin life all over again I would not marry.... No,
no!

[Enter KULIGIN in a regulation jacket.]

KULIGIN. [Going up to IRINA] Dear sister, allow me to congratulate you
on the day sacred to your good angel and to wish you, sincerely and from
the bottom of my heart, good health and all that one can wish for a girl
of your years. And then let me offer you this book as a present. [Gives
it to her] It is the history of our High School during the last fifty
years, written by myself. The book is worthless, and written because I
had nothing to do, but read it all the same. Good day, gentlemen! [To
VERSHININ] My name is Kuligin, I am a master of the local High School.
[Note: He adds that he is a _Nadvorny Sovetnik_ (almost the same as
a German _Hofrat_), an undistinguished civilian title with no English
equivalent.] [To IRINA] In this book you will find a list of all those
who have taken the full course at our High School during these fifty
years. _Feci quod potui, faciant meliora potentes_. [Kisses MASHA.]

IRINA. But you gave me one of these at Easter.

KULIGIN. [Laughs] I couldn’t have, surely! You’d better give it back
to me in that case, or else give it to the Colonel. Take it, Colonel.
You’ll read it some day when you’re bored.

VERSHININ. Thank you. [Prepares to go] I am extremely happy to have made
the acquaintance of...

OLGA. Must you go? No, not yet?

IRINA. You’ll stop and have lunch with us. Please do.

OLGA. Yes, please!

VERSHININ. [Bows] I seem to have dropped in on your name-day. Forgive
me, I didn’t know, and I didn’t offer you my congratulations. [Goes with
OLGA into the dining-room.]

KULIGIN. To-day is Sunday, the day of rest, so let us rest and rejoice,
each in a manner compatible with his age and disposition. The carpets
will have to be taken up for the summer and put away till the winter...
Persian powder or naphthaline.... The Romans were healthy because they
knew both how to work and how to rest, they had _mens sana in corpore
sano_. Their life ran along certain recognized patterns. Our director
says: “The chief thing about each life is its pattern. Whoever loses
his pattern is lost himself”--and it’s just the same in our daily life.
[Takes MASHA by the waist, laughing] Masha loves me. My wife loves me.
And you ought to put the window curtains away with the carpets.... I’m
feeling awfully pleased with life to-day. Masha, we’ve got to be at the
director’s at four. They’re getting up a walk for the pedagogues and
their families.

MASHA. I shan’t go.

KULIGIN. [Hurt] My dear Masha, why not?

MASHA. I’ll tell you later.... [Angrily] All right, I’ll go, only please
stand back.... [Steps away.]

KULIGIN. And then we’re to spend the evening at the director’s. In spite
of his ill-health that man tries, above everything else, to be sociable.
A splendid, illuminating personality. A wonderful man. After yesterday’s
committee he said to me: “I’m tired, Feodor Ilitch, I’m tired!” [Looks
at the clock, then at his watch] Your clock is seven minutes fast.
“Yes,” he said, “I’m tired.” [Violin played off.]

OLGA. Let’s go and have lunch! There’s to be a masterpiece of baking!

KULIGIN. Oh my dear Olga, my dear. Yesterday I was working till eleven
o’clock at night, and got awfully tired. To-day I’m quite happy. [Goes
into dining-room] My dear...

CHEBUTIKIN. [Puts his paper into his pocket, and combs his beard] A pie?
Splendid!

MASHA. [Severely to CHEBUTIKIN] Only mind; you’re not to drink anything
to-day. Do you hear? It’s bad for you.

CHEBUTIKIN. Oh, that’s all right. I haven’t been drunk for two years.
And it’s all the same, anyway!

MASHA. You’re not to dare to drink, all the same. [Angrily, but so that
her husband should not hear] Another dull evening at the Director’s,
confound it!

TUZENBACH. I shouldn’t go if I were you.... It’s quite simple.

CHEBUTIKIN. Don’t go.

MASHA. Yes, “don’t go....” It’s a cursed, unbearable life.... [Goes into
dining-room.]

CHEBUTIKIN. [Follows her] It’s not so bad.

SOLENI. [Going into the dining-room] There, there, there....

TUZENBACH. Vassili Vassilevitch, that’s enough. Be quiet!

SOLENI. There, there, there....

KULIGIN. [Gaily] Your health, Colonel! I’m a pedagogue and not quite at
home here. I’m Masha’s husband.... She’s a good sort, a very good sort.

VERSHININ. I’ll have some of this black vodka.... [Drinks] Your health!
[To OLGA] I’m very comfortable here!

[Only IRINA and TUZENBACH are now left in the sitting-room.]

IRINA. Masha’s out of sorts to-day. She married when she was eighteen,
when he seemed to her the wisest of men. And now it’s different. He’s
the kindest man, but not the wisest.

OLGA. [Impatiently] Andrey, when are you coming?

ANDREY. [Off] One minute. [Enters and goes to the table.]

TUZENBACH. What are you thinking about?

IRINA. I don’t like this Soleni of yours and I’m afraid of him. He only
says silly things.

TUZENBACH. He’s a queer man. I’m sorry for him, though he vexes me. I
think he’s shy. When there are just the two of us he’s quite all right
and very good company; when other people are about he’s rough and
hectoring. Don’t let’s go in, let them have their meal without us. Let
me stay with you. What are you thinking of? [Pause] You’re twenty. I’m
not yet thirty. How many years are there left to us, with their long,
long lines of days, filled with my love for you....

IRINA. Nicolai Lvovitch, don’t speak to me of love.

TUZENBACH. [Does not hear] I’ve a great thirst for life, struggle, and
work, and this thirst has united with my love for you, Irina, and you’re
so beautiful, and life seems so beautiful to me! What are you thinking
about?

IRINA. You say that life is beautiful. Yes, if only it seems so! The
life of us three hasn’t been beautiful yet; it has been stifling us as
if it was weeds... I’m crying. I oughtn’t.... [Dries her tears, smiles]
We must work, work. That is why we are unhappy and look at the world so
sadly; we don’t know what work is. Our parents despised work....

[Enter NATALIA IVANOVA; she wears a pink dress and a green sash.]

NATASHA. They’re already at lunch... I’m late... [Carefully examines
herself in a mirror, and puts herself straight] I think my hair’s done
all right.... [Sees IRINA] Dear Irina Sergeyevna, I congratulate you!
[Kisses her firmly and at length] You’ve so many visitors, I’m really
ashamed.... How do you do, Baron!

OLGA. [Enters from dining-room] Here’s Natalia Ivanovna. How are you,
dear! [They kiss.]

NATASHA. Happy returns. I’m awfully shy, you’ve so many people here.

OLGA. All our friends. [Frightened, in an undertone] You’re wearing a
green sash! My dear, you shouldn’t!

NATASHA. Is it a sign of anything?

OLGA. No, it simply doesn’t go well... and it looks so queer.

NATASHA. [In a tearful voice] Yes? But it isn’t really green, it’s too
dull for that. [Goes into dining-room with OLGA.]

[They have all sat down to lunch in the dining-room, the sitting-room is
empty.]

KULIGIN. I wish you a nice fiancée, Irina. It’s quite time you married.

CHEBUTIKIN. Natalia Ivanovna, I wish you the same.

KULIGIN. Natalia Ivanovna has a fiancé already.

MASHA. [Raps with her fork on a plate] Let’s all get drunk and make life
purple for once!

KULIGIN. You’ve lost three good conduct marks.

VERSHININ. This is a nice drink. What’s it made of?

SOLENI. Blackbeetles.

IRINA. [Tearfully] Phoo! How disgusting!

OLGA. There is to be a roast turkey and a sweet apple pie for dinner.
Thank goodness I can spend all day and the evening at home. You’ll come
in the evening, ladies and gentlemen....

VERSHININ. And please may I come in the evening!

IRINA. Please do.

NATASHA. They don’t stand on ceremony here.

CHEBUTIKIN. Nature only brought us into the world that we should love!
[Laughs.]

ANDREY. [Angrily] Please don’t! Aren’t you tired of it?

[Enter FEDOTIK and RODE with a large basket of flowers.]

FEDOTIK. They’re lunching already.

RODE. [Loudly and thickly] Lunching? Yes, so they are....

FEDOTIK. Wait a minute! [Takes a photograph] That’s one. No, just a
moment.... [Takes another] That’s two. Now we’re ready!

[They take the basket and go into the dining-room, where they have a
noisy reception.]

RODE. [Loudly] Congratulations and best wishes! Lovely weather to-day,
simply perfect. Was out walking with the High School students all the
morning. I take their drills.

FEDOTIK. You may move, Irina Sergeyevna! [Takes a photograph] You
look well to-day. [Takes a humming-top out of his pocket] Here’s a
humming-top, by the way. It’s got a lovely note!

IRINA. How awfully nice!

MASHA.

        “There stands a green oak by the sea,
        And a chain of bright gold is around it...
        And a chain of bright gold is around it...”

[Tearfully] What am I saying that for? I’ve had those words running in
my head all day....

KULIGIN. There are thirteen at table!

RODE. [Aloud] Surely you don’t believe in that superstition? [Laughter.]

KULIGIN. If there are thirteen at table then it means there are lovers
present. It isn’t you, Ivan Romanovitch, hang it all.... [Laughter.]

CHEBUTIKIN. I’m a hardened sinner, but I really don’t see why Natalia
Ivanovna should blush....

[Loud laughter; NATASHA runs out into the sitting-room, followed by
ANDREY.]

ANDREY. Don’t pay any attention to them! Wait... do stop, please....

NATASHA. I’m shy... I don’t know what’s the matter with me and they’re
all laughing at me. It wasn’t nice of me to leave the table like that,
but I can’t... I can’t. [Covers her face with her hands.]

ANDREY. My dear, I beg you. I implore you not to excite yourself. I
assure you they’re only joking, they’re kind people. My dear, good girl,
they’re all kind and sincere people, and they like both you and me. Come
here to the window, they can’t see us here.... [Looks round.]

NATASHA. I’m so unaccustomed to meeting people!

ANDREY. Oh your youth, your splendid, beautiful youth! My darling, don’t
be so excited! Believe me, believe me... I’m so happy, my soul is full
of love, of ecstasy.... They don’t see us! They can’t! Why, why or when
did I fall in love with you--Oh, I can’t understand anything. My dear,
my pure darling, be my wife! I love you, love you... as never before....
[They kiss.]

[Two officers come in and, seeing the lovers kiss, stop in
astonishment.]

Curtain.




ACT II

[Scene as before. It is 8 p.m. Somebody is heard playing a concertina
outside in’ the street. There is no fire. NATALIA IVANOVNA enters in
indoor dress carrying a candle; she stops by the door which leads into
ANDREY’S room.]

NATASHA. What are you doing, Andrey? Are you reading? It’s nothing, only
I.... [She opens another door, and looks in, then closes it] Isn’t there
any fire....

ANDREY. [Enters with book in hand] What are you doing, Natasha?

NATASHA. I was looking to see if there wasn’t a fire. It’s Shrovetide,
and the servant is simply beside herself; I must look out that something
doesn’t happen. When I came through the dining-room yesterday midnight,
there was a candle burning. I couldn’t get her to tell me who had
lighted it. [Puts down her candle] What’s the time?

ANDREY. [Looks at his watch] A quarter past eight.

NATASHA. And Olga and Irina aren’t in yet. The poor things are still at
work. Olga at the teacher’s council, Irina at the telegraph office....
[Sighs] I said to your sister this morning, “Irina, darling, you must
take care of yourself.” But she pays no attention. Did you say it was a
quarter past eight? I am afraid little Bobby is quite ill. Why is he so
cold? He was feverish yesterday, but to-day he is quite cold... I am so
frightened!

ANDREY. It’s all right, Natasha. The boy is well.

NATASHA. Still, I think we ought to put him on a diet. I am so afraid.
And the entertainers were to be here after nine; they had better not
come, Audrey.

ANDREY. I don’t know. After all, they were asked.

NATASHA. This morning, when the little boy woke up and saw me he
suddenly smiled; that means he knew me. “Good morning, Bobby!” I said,
“good morning, darling.” And he laughed. Children understand, they
understand very well. So I’ll tell them, Andrey dear, not to receive the
entertainers.

ANDREY. [Hesitatingly] But what about my sisters. This is their flat.

NATASHA. They’ll do as I want them. They are so kind.... [Going] I
ordered sour milk for supper. The doctor says you must eat sour milk
and nothing else, or you won’t get thin. [Stops] Bobby is so cold. I’m
afraid his room is too cold for him. It would be nice to put him into
another room till the warm weather comes. Irina’s room, for instance,
is just right for a child: it’s dry and has the sun all day. I must tell
her, she can share Olga’s room. It isn’t as if she was at home in the
daytime, she only sleeps here.... [A pause] Andrey, darling, why are you
so silent?

ANDREY. I was just thinking.... There is really nothing to say....

NATASHA. Yes... there was something I wanted to tell you.... Oh, yes.
Ferapont has come from the Council offices, he wants to see you.

ANDREY. [Yawns] Call him here.

[NATASHA goes out; ANDREY reads his book, stooping over the candle she
has left behind. FERAPONT enters; he wears a tattered old coat with the
collar up. His ears are muffled.]

ANDREY. Good morning, grandfather. What have you to say?

FERAPONT. The Chairman sends a book and some documents or other.
Here.... [Hands him a book and a packet.]

ANDREY. Thank you. It’s all right. Why couldn’t you come earlier? It’s
past eight now.

FERAPONT. What?

ANDREY. [Louder]. I say you’ve come late, it’s past eight.

FERAPONT. Yes, yes. I came when it was still light, but they wouldn’t
let me in. They said you were busy. Well, what was I to do. If you’re
busy, you’re busy, and I’m in no hurry. [He thinks that ANDREY is asking
him something] What?

ANDREY. Nothing. [Looks through the book] To-morrow’s Friday. I’m not
supposed to go to work, but I’ll come--all the same... and do some
work. It’s dull at home. [Pause] Oh, my dear old man, how strangely life
changes, and how it deceives! To-day, out of sheer boredom, I took up
this book--old university lectures, and I couldn’t help laughing. My
God, I’m secretary of the local district council, the council which has
Protopopov for its chairman, yes, I’m the secretary, and the summit of
my ambitions is--to become a member of the council! I to be a member
of the local district council, I, who dream every night that I’m a
professor of Moscow University, a famous scholar of whom all Russia is
proud!

FERAPONT. I can’t tell... I’m hard of hearing....

ANDREY. If you weren’t, I don’t suppose I should talk to you. I’ve got
to talk to somebody, and my wife doesn’t understand me, and I’m a bit
afraid of my sisters--I don’t know why unless it is that they may
make fun of me and make me feel ashamed... I don’t drink, I don’t like
public-houses, but how I should like to be sitting just now in Tyestov’s
place in Moscow, or at the Great Moscow, old fellow!

FERAPONT. Moscow? That’s where a contractor was once telling that some
merchants or other were eating pancakes; one ate forty pancakes and he
went and died, he was saying. Either forty or fifty, I forget which.

ANDREY. In Moscow you can sit in an enormous restaurant where you don’t
know anybody and where nobody knows you, and you don’t feel all the same
that you’re a stranger. And here you know everybody and everybody knows
you, and you’re a stranger... and a lonely stranger.

FERAPONT. What? And the same contractor was telling--perhaps he was
lying--that there was a cable stretching right across Moscow.

ANDREY. What for?

FERAPONT. I can’t tell. The contractor said so.

ANDREY. Rubbish. [He reads] Were you ever in Moscow?

FERAPONT. [After a pause] No. God did not lead me there. [Pause] Shall I
go?

ANDREY. You may go. Good-bye. [FERAPONT goes] Good-bye. [Reads] You can
come to-morrow and fetch these documents.... Go along.... [Pause] He’s
gone. [A ring] Yes, yes.... [Stretches himself and slowly goes into his
own room.]

[Behind the scene the nurse is singing a lullaby to the child. MASHA and
VERSHININ come in. While they talk, a maidservant lights candles and a
lamp.]

MASHA. I don’t know. [Pause] I don’t know. Of course, habit counts for
a great deal. After father’s death, for instance, it took us a long time
to get used to the absence of orderlies. But, apart from habit, it seems
to me in all fairness that, however it may be in other towns, the best
and most-educated people are army men.

VERSHININ. I’m thirsty. I should like some tea.

MASHA. [Glancing at her watch] They’ll bring some soon. I was given in
marriage when I was eighteen, and I was afraid of my husband because
he was a teacher and I’d only just left school. He then seemed to me
frightfully wise and learned and important. And now, unfortunately, that
has changed.

VERSHININ. Yes... yes.

MASHA. I don’t speak of my husband, I’ve grown used to him, but
civilians in general are so often coarse, impolite, uneducated. Their
rudeness offends me, it angers me. I suffer when I see that a man isn’t
quite sufficiently refined, or delicate, or polite. I simply suffer
agonies when I happen to be among schoolmasters, my husband’s
colleagues.

VERSHININ. Yes.... It seems to me that civilians and army men are
equally interesting, in this town, at any rate. It’s all the same! If
you listen to a member of the local intelligentsia, whether to civilian
or military, he will tell you that he’s sick of his wife, sick of
his house, sick of his estate, sick of his horses.... We Russians are
extremely gifted in the direction of thinking on an exalted plane, but,
tell me, why do we aim so low in real life? Why?

MASHA. Why?

VERSHININ. Why is a Russian sick of his children, sick of his wife? And
why are his wife and children sick of him?

MASHA. You’re a little downhearted to-day.

VERSHININ. Perhaps I am. I haven’t had any dinner, I’ve had nothing
since the morning. My daughter is a little unwell, and when my girls are
ill, I get very anxious and my conscience tortures me because they
have such a mother. Oh, if you had seen her to-day! What a trivial
personality! We began quarrelling at seven in the morning and at nine
I slammed the door and went out. [Pause] I never speak of her, it’s
strange that I bear my complaints to you alone. [Kisses her hand] Don’t
be angry with me. I haven’t anybody but you, nobody at all.... [Pause.]

MASHA. What a noise in the oven. Just before father’s death there was a
noise in the pipe, just like that.

VERSHININ. Are you superstitious?

MASHA. Yes.

VERSHININ. That’s strange. [Kisses her hand] You are a splendid,
wonderful woman. Splendid, wonderful! It is dark here, but I see your
sparkling eyes.

MASHA. [Sits on another chair] There is more light here.

VERSHININ. I love you, love you, love you... I love your eyes, your
movements, I dream of them.... Splendid, wonderful woman!

MASHA. [Laughing] When you talk to me like that, I laugh; I don’t know
why, for I’m afraid. Don’t repeat it, please.... [In an undertone] No,
go on, it’s all the same to me.... [Covers her face with her hands]
Somebody’s coming, let’s talk about something else.

[IRINA and TUZENBACH come in through the dining-room.]

TUZENBACH. My surname is really triple. I am called Baron
Tuzenbach-Krone-Altschauer, but I am Russian and Orthodox, the same as
you. There is very little German left in me, unless perhaps it is the
patience and the obstinacy with which I bore you. I see you home every
night.

IRINA. How tired I am!

TUZENBACH. And I’ll come to the telegraph office to see you home every
day for ten or twenty years, until you drive me away. [He sees MASHA and
VERSHININ; joyfully] Is that you? How do you do.

IRINA. Well, I am home at last. [To MASHA] A lady came to-day to
telegraph to her brother in Saratov that her son died to-day, and she
couldn’t remember the address anyhow. So she sent the telegram without
an address, just to Saratov. She was crying. And for some reason or
other I was rude to her. “I’ve no time,” I said. It was so stupid. Are
the entertainers coming to-night?

MASHA. Yes.

IRINA. [Sitting down in an armchair] I want a rest. I am tired.

TUZENBACH. [Smiling] When you come home from your work you seem so
young, and so unfortunate.... [Pause.]

IRINA. I am tired. No, I don’t like the telegraph office, I don’t like
it.

MASHA. You’ve grown thinner.... [Whistles a little] And you look
younger, and your face has become like a boy’s.

TUZENBACH. That’s the way she does her hair.

IRINA. I must find another job, this one won’t do for me. What I wanted,
what I hoped to get, just that is lacking here. Labour without poetry,
without ideas.... [A knock on the floor] The doctor is knocking. [To
TUZENBACH] Will you knock, dear. I can’t... I’m tired.... [TUZENBACH
knocks] He’ll come in a minute. Something ought to be done. Yesterday
the doctor and Andrey played cards at the club and lost money. Andrey
seems to have lost 200 roubles.

MASHA. [With indifference] What can we do now?

IRINA. He lost money a fortnight ago, he lost money in December. Perhaps
if he lost everything we should go away from this town. Oh, my God, I
dream of Moscow every night. I’m just like a lunatic. [Laughs] We go
there in June, and before June there’s still... February, March, April,
May... nearly half a year!

MASHA. Only Natasha mustn’t get to know of these losses.

IRINA. I expect it will be all the same to her.

[CHEBUTIKIN, who has only just got out of bed--he was resting after
dinner--comes into the dining-room and combs his beard. He then sits by
the table and takes a newspaper from his pocket.]

MASHA. Here he is.... Has he paid his rent?

IRINA. [Laughs] No. He’s been here eight months and hasn’t paid a
copeck. Seems to have forgotten.

MASHA. [Laughs] What dignity in his pose! [They all laugh. A pause.]

IRINA. Why are you so silent, Alexander Ignateyevitch?

VERSHININ. I don’t know. I want some tea. Half my life for a tumbler of
tea: I haven’t had anything since morning.

CHEBUTIKIN. Irina Sergeyevna!

IRINA. What is it?

CHEBUTIKIN. Please come here, Venez ici. [IRINA goes and sits by the
table] I can’t do without you. [IRINA begins to play patience.]

VERSHININ. Well, if we can’t have any tea, let’s philosophize, at any
rate.

TUZENBACH. Yes, let’s. About what?

VERSHININ. About what? Let us meditate... about life as it will be after
our time; for example, in two or three hundred years.

TUZENBACH. Well? After our time people will fly about in balloons, the
cut of one’s coat will change, perhaps they’ll discover a sixth sense
and develop it, but life will remain the same, laborious, mysterious,
and happy. And in a thousand years’ time, people will still be sighing:
“Life is hard!”--and at the same time they’ll be just as afraid of
death, and unwilling to meet it, as we are.

VERSHININ. [Thoughtfully] How can I put it? It seems to me that
everything on earth must change, little by little, and is already
changing under our very eyes. After two or three hundred years, after
a thousand--the actual time doesn’t matter--a new and happy age will
begin. We, of course, shall not take part in it, but we live and work
and even suffer to-day that it should come. We create it--and in that
one object is our destiny and, if you like, our happiness.

[MASHA laughs softly.]

TUZENBACH. What is it?

MASHA. I don’t know. I’ve been laughing all day, ever since morning.

VERSHININ. I finished my education at the same point as you, I have not
studied at universities; I read a lot, but I cannot choose my books and
perhaps what I read is not at all what I should, but the longer I love,
the more I want to know. My hair is turning white, I am nearly an old
man now, but I know so little, oh, so little! But I think I know the
things that matter most, and that are most real. I know them well. And I
wish I could make you understand that there is no happiness for us,
that there should not and cannot be.... We must only work and work, and
happiness is only for our distant posterity. [Pause] If not for me, then
for the descendants of my descendants.

[FEDOTIK and RODE come into the dining-room; they sit and sing softly,
strumming on a guitar.]

TUZENBACH. According to you, one should not even think about happiness!
But suppose I am happy!

VERSHININ. No.

TUZENBACH. [Moves his hands and laughs] We do not seem to understand
each other. How can I convince you? [MASHA laughs quietly, TUZENBACH
continues, pointing at her] Yes, laugh! [To VERSHININ] Not only after
two or three centuries, but in a million years, life will still be as it
was; life does not change, it remains for ever, following its own laws
which do not concern us, or which, at any rate, you will never find out.
Migrant birds, cranes for example, fly and fly, and whatever thoughts,
high or low, enter their heads, they will still fly and not know why or
where. They fly and will continue to fly, whatever philosophers come to
life among them; they may philosophize as much as they like, only they
will fly....

MASHA. Still, is there a meaning?

TUZENBACH. A meaning.... Now the snow is falling. What meaning? [Pause.]

MASHA. It seems to me that a man must have faith, or must search for a
faith, or his life will be empty, empty.... To live and not to know why
the cranes fly, why babies are born, why there are stars in the sky....
Either you must know why you live, or everything is trivial, not worth a
straw. [A pause.]

VERSHININ. Still, I am sorry that my youth has gone.

MASHA. Gogol says: life in this world is a dull matter, my masters!

TUZENBACH. And I say it’s difficult to argue with you, my masters! Hang
it all.

CHEBUTIKIN. [Reading] Balzac was married at Berdichev. [IRINA is singing
softly] That’s worth making a note of. [He makes a note] Balzac was
married at Berdichev. [Goes on reading.]

IRINA. [Laying out cards, thoughtfully] Balzac was married at Berdichev.

TUZENBACH. The die is cast. I’ve handed in my resignation, Maria
Sergeyevna.

MASHA. So I heard. I don’t see what good it is; I don’t like civilians.

TUZENBACH. Never mind.... [Gets up] I’m not handsome; what use am I as a
soldier? Well, it makes no difference... I shall work. If only just once
in my life I could work so that I could come home in the evening,
fall exhausted on my bed, and go to sleep at once. [Going into the
dining-room] Workmen, I suppose, do sleep soundly!

FEDOTIK. [To IRINA] I bought some coloured pencils for you at Pizhikov’s
in the Moscow Road, just now. And here is a little knife.

IRINA. You have got into the habit of behaving to me as if I am a little
girl, but I am grown up. [Takes the pencils and the knife, then, with
joy] How lovely!

FEDOTIK. And I bought myself a knife... look at it... one blade,
another, a third, an ear-scoop, scissors, nail-cleaners.

RODE. [Loudly] Doctor, how old are you?

CHEBUTIKIN. I? Thirty-two. [Laughter]

FEDOTIK. I’ll show you another kind of patience.... [Lays out cards.]

[A samovar is brought in; ANFISA attends to it; a little later NATASHA
enters and helps by the table; SOLENI arrives and, after greetings, sits
by the table.]

VERSHININ. What a wind!

MASHA. Yes. I’m tired of winter. I’ve already forgotten what summer’s
like.

IRINA. It’s coming out, I see. We’re going to Moscow.

FEDOTIK. No, it won’t come out. Look, the eight was on the two of
spades. [Laughs] That means you won’t go to Moscow.

CHEBUTIKIN. [Reading paper] Tsitsigar. Smallpox is raging here.

ANFISA. [Coming up to MASHA] Masha, have some tea, little mother. [To
VERSHININ] Please have some, sir... excuse me, but I’ve forgotten your
name....

MASHA. Bring some here, nurse. I shan’t go over there.

IRINA. Nurse!

ANFISA. Coming, coming!

NATASHA. [To SOLENI] Children at the breast understand perfectly. I said
“Good morning, Bobby; good morning, dear!” And he looked at me in quite
an unusual way. You think it’s only the mother in me that is speaking; I
assure you that isn’t so! He’s a wonderful child.

SOLENI. If he was my child I’d roast him on a frying-pan and eat him.
[Takes his tumbler into the drawing-room and sits in a corner.]

NATASHA. [Covers her face in her hands] Vulgar, ill-bred man!

MASHA. He’s lucky who doesn’t notice whether it’s winter now, or summer.
I think that if I were in Moscow, I shouldn’t mind about the weather.

VERSHININ. A few days ago I was reading the prison diary of a French
minister. He had been sentenced on account of the Panama scandal. With
what joy, what delight, he speaks of the birds he saw through the prison
windows, which he had never noticed while he was a minister. Now, of
course, that he is at liberty, he notices birds no more than he did
before. When you go to live in Moscow you’ll not notice it, in just
the same way. There can be no happiness for us, it only exists in our
wishes.

TUZENBACH. [Takes cardboard box from the table] Where are the pastries?

IRINA. Soleni has eaten them.

TUZENBACH. All of them?

ANFISA. [Serving tea] There’s a letter for you.

VERSHININ. For me? [Takes the letter] From my daughter. [Reads] Yes, of
course... I will go quietly. Excuse me, Maria Sergeyevna. I shan’t have
any tea. [Stands up, excited] That eternal story....

MASHA. What is it? Is it a secret?

VERSHININ. [Quietly] My wife has poisoned herself again. I must go. I’ll
go out quietly. It’s all awfully unpleasant. [Kisses MASHA’S hand] My
dear, my splendid, good woman... I’ll go this way, quietly. [Exit.]

ANFISA. Where has he gone? And I’d served tea.... What a man.

MASHA. [Angrily] Be quiet! You bother so one can’t have a moment’s
peace.... [Goes to the table with her cup] I’m tired of you, old woman!

ANFISA. My dear! Why are you offended!

ANDREY’S VOICE. Anfisa!

ANFISA. [Mocking] Anfisa! He sits there and... [Exit.]

MASHA. [In the dining-room, by the table angrily] Let me sit down!
[Disturbs the cards on the table] Here you are, spreading your cards
out. Have some tea!

IRINA. You are cross, Masha.

MASHA. If I am cross, then don’t talk to me. Don’t touch me!

CHEBUTIKIN. Don’t touch her, don’t touch her....

MASHA. You’re sixty, but you’re like a boy, always up to some beastly
nonsense.

NATASHA. [Sighs] Dear Masha, why use such expressions? With your
beautiful exterior you would be simply fascinating in good society,
I tell you so directly, if it wasn’t for your words. _Je vous prie,
pardonnez moi, Marie, mais vous avez des manières un peu grossières_.

TUZENBACH. [Restraining his laughter] Give me... give me... there’s some
cognac, I think.

NATASHA. _Il parait, que mon Bobick déjà ne dort pas_, he has awakened.
He isn’t well to-day. I’ll go to him, excuse me... [Exit.]

IRINA. Where has Alexander Ignateyevitch gone?

MASHA. Home. Something extraordinary has happened to his wife again.

TUZENBACH. [Goes to SOLENI with a cognac-flask in his hands] You go on
sitting by yourself, thinking of something--goodness knows what. Come
and let’s make peace. Let’s have some cognac. [They drink] I expect I’ll
have to play the piano all night, some rubbish most likely... well, so
be it!

SOLENI. Why make peace? I haven’t quarrelled with you.

TUZENBACH. You always make me feel as if something has taken place
between us. You’ve a strange character, you must admit.

SOLENI. [Declaims] “I am strange, but who is not? Don’t be angry,
Aleko!”

TUZENBACH. And what has Aleko to do with it? [Pause.]

SOLENI. When I’m with one other man I behave just like everybody else,
but in company I’m dull and shy and... talk all manner of rubbish. But
I’m more honest and more honourable than very, very many people. And I
can prove it.

TUZENBACH. I often get angry with you, you always fasten on to me
in company, but I like you all the same. I’m going to drink my fill
to-night, whatever happens. Drink, now!

SOLENI. Let’s drink. [They drink] I never had anything against you,
Baron. But my character is like Lermontov’s [In a low voice] I even
rather resemble Lermontov, they say.... [Takes a scent-bottle from his
pocket, and scents his hands.]

TUZENBACH. I’ve sent in my resignation. Basta! I’ve been thinking about
it for five years, and at last made up my mind. I shall work.

SOLENI. [Declaims] “Do not be angry, Aleko... forget, forget, thy dreams
of yore....”

[While he is speaking ANDREY enters quietly with a book, and sits by the
table.]

TUZENBACH. I shall work.

CHEBUTIKIN. [Going with IRINA into the dining-room] And the food was
also real Caucasian onion soup, and, for a roast, some chehartma.

SOLENI. Cheremsha [Note: A variety of garlic.] isn’t meat at all, but a
plant something like an onion.

CHEBUTIKIN. No, my angel. Chehartma isn’t onion, but roast mutton.

SOLENI. And I tell you, chehartma--is a sort of onion.

CHEBUTIKIN. And I tell you, chehartma--is mutton.

SOLENI. And I tell you, cheremsha--is a sort of onion.

CHEBUTIKIN. What’s the use of arguing! You’ve never been in the
Caucasus, and never ate any chehartma.

SOLENI. I never ate it, because I hate it. It smells like garlic.

ANDREY. [Imploring] Please, please! I ask you!

TUZENBACH. When are the entertainers coming?

IRINA. They promised for about nine; that is, quite soon.

TUZENBACH. [Embraces ANDREY]

    “Oh my house, my house, my new-built house.”

ANDREY. [Dances and sings]    “Newly-built of maple-wood.”

CHEBUTIKIN. [Dances]

    “Its walls are like a sieve!” [Laughter.]

TUZENBACH. [Kisses ANDREY] Hang it all, let’s drink. Andrey, old boy,
let’s drink with you. And I’ll go with you, Andrey, to the University of
Moscow.

SOLENI. Which one? There are two universities in Moscow.

ANDREY. There’s one university in Moscow.

SOLENI. Two, I tell you.

ANDREY. Don’t care if there are three. So much the better.

SOLENI. There are two universities in Moscow! [There are murmurs and
“hushes”] There are two universities in Moscow, the old one and the new
one. And if you don’t like to listen, if my words annoy you, then I need
not speak. I can even go into another room.... [Exit.]

TUZENBACH. Bravo, bravo! [Laughs] Come on, now. I’m going to play. Funny
man, Soleni.... [Goes to the piano and plays a waltz.]

MASHA. [Dancing solo] The Baron’s drunk, the Baron’s drunk, the Baron’s
drunk!

[NATASHA comes in.]

NATASHA. [To CHEBUTIKIN] Ivan Romanovitch!

[Says something to CHEBUTIKIN, then goes out quietly; CHEBUTIKIN touches
TUZENBACH on the shoulder and whispers something to him.]

IRINA. What is it?

CHEBUTIKIN. Time for us to go. Good-bye.

TUZENBACH. Good-night. It’s time we went.

IRINA. But, really, the entertainers?

ANDREY. [In confusion] There won’t be any entertainers. You see, dear,
Natasha says that Bobby isn’t quite well, and so.... In a word, I don’t
care, and it’s absolutely all one to me.

IRINA. [Shrugging her shoulders] Bobby ill!

MASHA. What is she thinking of! Well, if they are sent home, I suppose
they must go. [To IRINA] Bobby’s all right, it’s she herself.... Here!
[Taps her forehead] Little bourgeoise!

[ANDREY goes to his room through the right-hand door, CHEBUTIKIN follows
him. In the dining-room they are saying good-bye.]

FEDOTIK. What a shame! I was expecting to spend the evening here, but of
course, if the little baby is ill... I’ll bring him some toys to-morrow.

RODE. [Loudly] I slept late after dinner to-day because I thought I was
going to dance all night. It’s only nine o’clock now!

MASHA. Let’s go into the street, we can talk there. Then we can settle
things.

(Good-byes and good nights are heard. TUZENBACH’S merry laughter is
heard. [All go out] ANFISA and the maid clear the table, and put out
the lights. [The nurse sings] ANDREY, wearing an overcoat and a hat, and
CHEBUTIKIN enter silently.)

CHEBUTIKIN. I never managed to get married because my life flashed by
like lightning, and because I was madly in love with your mother, who
was married.

ANDREY. One shouldn’t marry. One shouldn’t, because it’s dull.

CHEBUTIKIN. So there I am, in my loneliness. Say what you will,
loneliness is a terrible thing, old fellow.... Though really... of
course, it absolutely doesn’t matter!

ANDREY. Let’s be quicker.

CHEBUTIKIN. What are you in such a hurry for? We shall be in time.

ANDREY. I’m afraid my wife may stop me.

CHEBUTIKIN. Ah!

ANDREY. I shan’t play to-night, I shall only sit and look on. I don’t
feel very well.... What am I to do for my asthma, Ivan Romanovitch?

CHEBUTIKIN. Don’t ask me! I don’t remember, old fellow, I don’t know.

ANDREY. Let’s go through the kitchen. [They go out.]

[A bell rings, then a second time; voices and laughter are heard.]

IRINA. [Enters] What’s that?

ANFISA. [Whispers] The entertainers! [Bell.]

IRINA. Tell them there’s nobody at home, nurse. They must excuse us.

[ANFISA goes out. IRINA walks about the room deep in thought; she is
excited. SOLENI enters.]

SOLENI. [In surprise] There’s nobody here.... Where are they all?

IRINA. They’ve gone home.

SOLENI. How strange. Are you here alone?

IRINA. Yes, alone. [A pause] Good-bye.

SOLENI. Just now I behaved tactlessly, with insufficient reserve. But
you are not like all the others, you are noble and pure, you can see
the truth.... You alone can understand me. I love you, deeply, beyond
measure, I love you.

IRINA. Good-bye! Go away.

SOLENI. I cannot live without you. [Follows her] Oh, my happiness!
[Through his tears] Oh, joy! Wonderful, marvellous, glorious eyes, such
as I have never seen before....

IRINA. [Coldly] Stop it, Vassili Vassilevitch!

SOLENI. This is the first time I speak to you of love, and it is as if
I am no longer on the earth, but on another planet. [Wipes his forehead]
Well, never mind. I can’t make you love me by force, of course... but I
don’t intend to have any more-favoured rivals.... No... I swear to you
by all the saints, I shall kill my rival.... Oh, beautiful one!

[NATASHA enters with a candle; she looks in through one door, then
through another, and goes past the door leading to her husband’s room.]

NATASHA. Here’s Andrey. Let him go on reading. Excuse me, Vassili
Vassilevitch, I did not know you were here; I am engaged in
domesticities.

SOLENI. It’s all the same to me. Good-bye! [Exit.]

NATASHA. You’re so tired, my poor dear girl! [Kisses IRINA] If you only
went to bed earlier.

IRINA. Is Bobby asleep?

NATASHA. Yes, but restlessly. By the way, dear, I wanted to tell you,
but either you weren’t at home, or I was busy... I think Bobby’s present
nursery is cold and damp. And your room would be so nice for the child.
My dear, darling girl, do change over to Olga’s for a bit!

IRINA. [Not understanding] Where?

[The bells of a troika are heard as it drives up to the house.]

NATASHA. You and Olga can share a room, for the time being, and Bobby
can have yours. He’s such a darling; to-day I said to him, “Bobby,
you’re mine! Mine!” And he looked at me with his dear little eyes.
[A bell rings] It must be Olga. How late she is! [The maid enters and
whispers to NATASHA] Protopopov? What a queer man to do such a thing.
Protopopov’s come and wants me to go for a drive with him in his troika.
[Laughs] How funny these men are.... [A bell rings] Somebody has come.
Suppose I did go and have half an hour’s drive.... [To the maid] Say
I shan’t be long. [Bell rings] Somebody’s ringing, it must be Olga.
[Exit.]

[The maid runs out; IRINA sits deep in thought; KULIGIN and OLGA enter,
followed by VERSHININ.]

KULIGIN. Well, there you are. And you said there was going to be a
party.

VERSHININ. It’s queer; I went away not long ago, half an hour ago, and
they were expecting entertainers.

IRINA. They’ve all gone.

KULIGIN. Has Masha gone too? Where has she gone? And what’s Protopopov
waiting for downstairs in his troika? Whom is he expecting?

IRINA. Don’t ask questions... I’m tired.

KULIGIN. Oh, you’re all whimsies....

OLGA. My committee meeting is only just over. I’m tired out. Our
chairwoman is ill, so I had to take her place. My head, my head is
aching.... [Sits] Andrey lost 200 roubles at cards yesterday... the
whole town is talking about it....

KULIGIN. Yes, my meeting tired me too. [Sits.]

VERSHININ. My wife took it into her head to frighten me just now by
nearly poisoning herself. It’s all right now, and I’m glad; I can rest
now.... But perhaps we ought to go away? Well, my best wishes, Feodor
Ilitch, let’s go somewhere together! I can’t, I absolutely can’t stop at
home.... Come on!

KULIGIN. I’m tired. I won’t go. [Gets up] I’m tired. Has my wife gone
home?

IRINA. I suppose so.

KULIGIN. [Kisses IRINA’S hand] Good-bye, I’m going to rest all day
to-morrow and the day after. Best wishes! [Going] I should like some
tea. I was looking forward to spending the whole evening in pleasant
company and--o, fallacem hominum spem!... Accusative case after an
interjection....

VERSHININ. Then I’ll go somewhere by myself. [Exit with KULIGIN,
whistling.]

OLGA. I’ve such a headache... Andrey has been losing money.... The whole
town is talking.... I’ll go and lie down. [Going] I’m free to-morrow....
Oh, my God, what a mercy! I’m free to-morrow, I’m free the day after....
Oh my head, my head.... [Exit.]

IRINA. [alone] They’ve all gone. Nobody’s left.

[A concertina is being played in the street. The nurse sings.]

NATASHA. [in fur coat and cap, steps across the dining-room, followed
by the maid] I’ll be back in half an hour. I’m only going for a little
drive. [Exit.]

IRINA. [Alone in her misery] To Moscow! Moscow! Moscow!

Curtain.




ACT III

[The room shared by OLGA and IRINA. Beds, screened off, on the right and
left. It is past 2 a.m. Behind the stage a fire-alarm is ringing; it has
apparently been going for some time. Nobody in the house has gone to bed
yet. MASHA is lying on a sofa dressed, as usual, in black. Enter OLGA
and ANFISA.]

ANFISA. Now they are downstairs, sitting under the stairs. I said to
them, “Won’t you come up,” I said, “You can’t go on like this,” and they
simply cried, “We don’t know where father is.” They said, “He may be
burnt up by now.” What an idea! And in the yard there are some people...
also undressed.

OLGA. [Takes a dress out of the cupboard] Take this grey dress.... And
this... and the blouse as well.... Take the skirt, too, nurse.... My
God! How awful it is! The whole of the Kirsanovsky Road seems to have
burned down. Take this... and this.... [Throws clothes into her hands]
The poor Vershinins are so frightened.... Their house was nearly burnt.
They ought to come here for the night.... They shouldn’t be allowed
to go home.... Poor Fedotik is completely burnt out, there’s nothing
left....

ANFISA. Couldn’t you call Ferapont, Olga dear. I can hardly manage....

OLGA. [Rings] They’ll never answer.... [At the door] Come here, whoever
there is! [Through the open door can be seen a window, red with flame:
afire-engine is heard passing the house] How awful this is. And how I’m
sick of it! [FERAPONT enters] Take these things down.... The Kolotilin
girls are down below... and let them have them. This, too.

FERAPONT. Yes’m. In the year twelve Moscow was burning too. Oh, my God!
The Frenchmen were surprised.

OLGA. Go on, go on....

FERAPONT. Yes’m. [Exit.]

OLGA. Nurse, dear, let them have everything. We don’t want anything.
Give it all to them, nurse.... I’m tired, I can hardly keep on my
legs.... The Vershinins mustn’t be allowed to go home.... The girls can
sleep in the drawing-room, and Alexander Ignateyevitch can go downstairs
to the Baron’s flat... Fedotik can go there, too, or else into our
dining-room.... The doctor is drunk, beastly drunk, as if on purpose,
so nobody can go to him. Vershinin’s wife, too, may go into the
drawing-room.

ANFISA. [Tired] Olga, dear girl, don’t dismiss me! Don’t dismiss me!

OLGA. You’re talking nonsense, nurse. Nobody is dismissing you.

ANFISA. [Puts OLGA’S head against her bosom] My dear, precious girl, I’m
working, I’m toiling away... I’m growing weak, and they’ll all say go
away! And where shall I go? Where? I’m eighty. Eighty-one years old....

OLGA. You sit down, nurse dear.... You’re tired, poor dear.... [Makes
her sit down] Rest, dear. You’re so pale!

[NATASHA comes in.]

NATASHA. They are saying that a committee to assist the sufferers from
the fire must be formed at once. What do you think of that? It’s a
beautiful idea. Of course the poor ought to be helped, it’s the duty of
the rich. Bobby and little Sophy are sleeping, sleeping as if nothing at
all was the matter. There’s such a lot of people here, the place is full
of them, wherever you go. There’s influenza in the town now. I’m afraid
the children may catch it.

OLGA. [Not attending] In this room we can’t see the fire, it’s quiet
here.

NATASHA. Yes... I suppose I’m all untidy. [Before the looking-glass]
They say I’m growing stout... it isn’t true! Certainly it isn’t! Masha’s
asleep; the poor thing is tired out.... [Coldly, to ANFISA] Don’t dare
to be seated in my presence! Get up! Out of this! [Exit ANFISA; a pause]
I don’t understand what makes you keep on that old woman!

OLGA. [Confusedly] Excuse me, I don’t understand either...

NATASHA. She’s no good here. She comes from the country, she ought to
live there.... Spoiling her, I call it! I like order in the house!
We don’t want any unnecessary people here. [Strokes her cheek] You’re
tired, poor thing! Our head mistress is tired! And when my little Sophie
grows up and goes to school I shall be so afraid of you.

OLGA. I shan’t be head mistress.

NATASHA. They’ll appoint you, Olga. It’s settled.

OLGA. I’ll refuse the post. I can’t... I’m not strong enough.... [Drinks
water] You were so rude to nurse just now... I’m sorry. I can’t stand
it... everything seems dark in front of me....

NATASHA. [Excited] Forgive me, Olga, forgive me... I didn’t want to
annoy you.

[MASHA gets up, takes a pillow and goes out angrily.]

OLGA. Remember, dear... we have been brought up, in an unusual way,
perhaps, but I can’t bear this. Such behaviour has a bad effect on me, I
get ill... I simply lose heart!

NATASHA. Forgive me, forgive me.... [Kisses her.]

OLGA. Even the least bit of rudeness, the slightest impoliteness, upsets
me.

NATASHA. I often say too much, it’s true, but you must agree, dear, that
she could just as well live in the country.

OLGA. She has been with us for thirty years.

NATASHA. But she can’t do any work now. Either I don’t understand, or
you don’t want to understand me. She’s no good for work, she can only
sleep or sit about.

OLGA. And let her sit about.

NATASHA. [Surprised] What do you mean? She’s only a servant. [Crying] I
don’t understand you, Olga. I’ve got a nurse, a wet-nurse, we’ve a cook,
a housemaid... what do we want that old woman for as well? What good is
she? [Fire-alarm behind the stage.]

OLGA. I’ve grown ten years older to-night.

NATASHA. We must come to an agreement, Olga. Your place is the school,
mine--the home. You devote yourself to teaching, I, to the household.
And if I talk about servants, then I do know what I am talking about; I
do know what I am talking about... And to-morrow there’s to be no more
of that old thief, that old hag... [Stamping] that witch! And don’t you
dare to annoy me! Don’t you dare! [Stopping short] Really, if you don’t
move downstairs, we shall always be quarrelling. This is awful.

[Enter KULIGIN.]

KULIGIN. Where’s Masha? It’s time we went home. The fire seems to be
going down. [Stretches himself] Only one block has burnt down, but there
was such a wind that it seemed at first the whole town was going to
burn. [Sits] I’m tired out. My dear Olga... I often think that if
it hadn’t been for Masha, I should have married you. You are awfully
nice.... I am absolutely tired out. [Listens.]

OLGA. What is it?

KULIGIN. The doctor, of course, has been drinking hard; he’s terribly
drunk. He might have done it on purpose! [Gets up] He seems to be coming
here.... Do you hear him? Yes, here.... [Laughs] What a man... really...
I’ll hide myself. [Goes to the cupboard and stands in the corner] What a
rogue.

OLGA. He hadn’t touched a drop for two years, and now he suddenly goes
and gets drunk....

[Retires with NATASHA to the back of the room. CHEBUTIKIN enters;
apparently sober, he stops, looks round, then goes to the wash-stand and
begins to wash his hands.]

CHEBUTIKIN. [Angrily] Devil take them all... take them all.... They
think I’m a doctor and can cure everything, and I know absolutely
nothing, I’ve forgotten all I ever knew, I remember nothing, absolutely
nothing. [OLGA and NATASHA go out, unnoticed by him] Devil take it. Last
Wednesday I attended a woman in Zasip--and she died, and it’s my fault
that she died. Yes... I used to know a certain amount five-and-twenty
years ago, but I don’t remember anything now. Nothing. Perhaps I’m not
really a man, and am only pretending that I’ve got arms and legs and a
head; perhaps I don’t exist at all, and only imagine that I walk, and
eat, and sleep. [Cries] Oh, if only I didn’t exist! [Stops crying;
angrily] The devil only knows.... Day before yesterday they were talking
in the club; they said, Shakespeare, Voltaire... I’d never read, never
read at all, and I put on an expression as if I had read. And so did the
others. Oh, how beastly! How petty! And then I remembered the woman
I killed on Wednesday... and I couldn’t get her out of my mind, and
everything in my mind became crooked, nasty, wretched.... So I went and
drank....

[IRINA, VERSHININ and TUZENBACH enter; TUZENBACH is wearing new and
fashionable civilian clothes.]

IRINA. Let’s sit down here. Nobody will come in here.

VERSHININ. The whole town would have been destroyed if it hadn’t been
for the soldiers. Good men! [Rubs his hands appreciatively] Splendid
people! Oh, what a fine lot!

KULIGIN. [Coming up to him] What’s the time?

TUZENBACH. It’s past three now. It’s dawning.

IRINA. They are all sitting in the dining-room, nobody is going. And
that Soleni of yours is sitting there. [To CHEBUTIKIN] Hadn’t you better
be going to sleep, doctor?

CHEBUTIKIN. It’s all right... thank you.... [Combs his beard.]

KULIGIN. [Laughs] Speaking’s a bit difficult, eh, Ivan Romanovitch!
[Pats him on the shoulder] Good man! _In vino veritas_, the ancients
used to say.

TUZENBACH. They keep on asking me to get up a concert in aid of the
sufferers.

IRINA. As if one could do anything....

TUZENBACH. It might be arranged, if necessary. In my opinion Maria
Sergeyevna is an excellent pianist.

KULIGIN. Yes, excellent!

IRINA. She’s forgotten everything. She hasn’t played for three years...
or four.

TUZENBACH. In this town absolutely nobody understands music, not a soul
except myself, but I do understand it, and assure you on my word of
honour that Maria Sergeyevna plays excellently, almost with genius.

KULIGIN. You are right, Baron, I’m awfully fond of Masha. She’s very
fine.

TUZENBACH. To be able to play so admirably and to realize at the same
time that nobody, nobody can understand you!

KULIGIN. [Sighs] Yes.... But will it be quite all right for her to take
part in a concert? [Pause] You see, I don’t know anything about it.
Perhaps it will even be all to the good. Although I must admit that our
Director is a good man, a very good man even, a very clever man, still
he has such views.... Of course it isn’t his business but still, if you
wish it, perhaps I’d better talk to him.

[CHEBUTIKIN takes a porcelain clock into his hands and examines it.]

VERSHININ. I got so dirty while the fire was on, I don’t look like
anybody on earth. [Pause] Yesterday I happened to hear, casually, that
they want to transfer our brigade to some distant place. Some said to
Poland, others, to Chita.

TUZENBACH. I heard so, too. Well, if it is so, the town will be quite
empty.

IRINA. And we’ll go away, too!

CHEBUTIKIN. [Drops the clock which breaks to pieces] To smithereens!

[A pause; everybody is pained and confused.]

KULIGIN. [Gathering up the pieces] To smash such a valuable object--oh,
Ivan Romanovitch, Ivan Romanovitch! A very bad mark for your
misbehaviour!

IRINA. That clock used to belong to our mother.

CHEBUTIKIN. Perhaps.... To your mother, your mother. Perhaps I didn’t
break it; it only looks as if I broke it. Perhaps we only think that
we exist, when really we don’t. I don’t know anything, nobody knows
anything. [At the door] What are you looking at? Natasha has a little
romance with Protopopov, and you don’t see it.... There you sit and see
nothing, and Natasha has a little romance with Protopovov.... [Sings]
Won’t you please accept this date.... [Exit.]

VERSHININ. Yes. [Laughs] How strange everything really is! [Pause] When
the fire broke out, I hurried off home; when I get there I see the house
is whole, uninjured, and in no danger, but my two girls are standing by
the door in just their underclothes, their mother isn’t there, the crowd
is excited, horses and dogs are running about, and the girls’ faces are
so agitated, terrified, beseeching, and I don’t know what else. My heart
was pained when I saw those faces. My God, I thought, what these girls
will have to put up with if they live long! I caught them up and ran,
and still kept on thinking the one thing: what they will have to live
through in this world! [Fire-alarm; a pause] I come here and find their
mother shouting and angry. [MASHA enters with a pillow and sits on
the sofa] And when my girls were standing by the door in just their
underclothes, and the street was red from the fire, there was a dreadful
noise, and I thought that something of the sort used to happen many
years ago when an enemy made a sudden attack, and looted, and burned....
And at the same time what a difference there really is between the
present and the past! And when a little more time has gone by, in two or
three hundred years perhaps, people will look at our present life with
just the same fear, and the same contempt, and the whole past will seem
clumsy and dull, and very uncomfortable, and strange. Oh, indeed, what a
life there will be, what a life! [Laughs] Forgive me, I’ve dropped
into philosophy again. Please let me continue. I do awfully want to
philosophize, it’s just how I feel at present. [Pause] As if they
are all asleep. As I was saying: what a life there will be! Only just
imagine.... There are only three persons like yourselves in the town
just now, but in future generations there will be more and more, and
still more, and the time will come when everything will change and
become as you would have it, people will live as you do, and then you
too will go out of date; people will be born who are better than
you.... [Laughs] Yes, to-day I am quite exceptionally in the vein. I am
devilishly keen on living.... [Sings.]

             “The power of love all ages know,
              From its assaults great good does grow.” [Laughs.]

MASHA. Trum-tum-tum...

VERSHININ. Tum-tum...

MASHA. Tra-ra-ra?

VERSHININ. Tra-ta-ta. [Laughs.]

[Enter FEDOTIK.]

FEDOTIK. [Dancing] I’m burnt out, I’m burnt out! Down to the ground!
[Laughter.]

IRINA. I don’t see anything funny about it. Is everything burnt?

FEDOTIK. [Laughs] Absolutely. Nothing left at all. The guitar’s burnt,
and the photographs are burnt, and all my correspondence.... And I was
going to make you a present of a note-book, and that’s burnt too.

[SOLENI comes in.]

IRINA. No, you can’t come here, Vassili Vassilevitch. Please go away.

SOLENI. Why can the Baron come here and I can’t?

VERSHININ. We really must go. How’s the fire?

SOLENI. They say it’s going down. No, I absolutely don’t see why the
Baron can, and I can’t? [Scents his hands.]

VERSHININ. Trum-tum-tum.

MASHA. Trum-tum.

VERSHININ. [Laughs to SOLENI] Let’s go into the dining-room.

SOLENI. Very well, we’ll make a note of it. “If I should try to make
this clear, the geese would be annoyed, I fear.” [Looks at TUZENBACH]
There, there, there.... [Goes out with VERSHININ and FEDOTIK.]

IRINA. How Soleni smelt of tobacco.... [In surprise] The Baron’s asleep!
Baron! Baron!

TUZENBACH. [Waking] I am tired, I must say.... The brickworks....
No, I’m not wandering, I mean it; I’m going to start work soon at the
brickworks... I’ve already talked it over. [Tenderly, to IRINA] You’re
so pale, and beautiful, and charming.... Your paleness seems to shine
through the dark air as if it was a light.... You are sad, displeased
with life.... Oh, come with me, let’s go and work together!

MASHA. Nicolai Lvovitch, go away from here.

TUZENBACH. [Laughs] Are you here? I didn’t see you. [Kisses IRINA’S
hand] good-bye, I’ll go... I look at you now and I remember, as if it
was long ago, your name-day, when you, cheerfully and merrily, were
talking about the joys of labour.... And how happy life seemed to me,
then! What has happened to it now? [Kisses her hand] There are tears in
your eyes. Go to bed now; it is already day... the morning begins.... If
only I was allowed to give my life for you!

MASHA. Nicolai Lvovitch, go away! What business...

TUZENBACH. I’m off. [Exit.]

MASHA. [Lies down] Are you asleep, Feodor?

KULIGIN. Eh?

MASHA. Shouldn’t you go home.

KULIGIN. My dear Masha, my darling Masha....

IRINA. She’s tired out. You might let her rest, Fedia.

KULIGIN. I’ll go at once. My wife’s a good, splendid... I love you, my
only one....

MASHA. [Angrily] Amo, amas, amat, amamus, amatis, amant.

KULIGIN. [Laughs] No, she really is wonderful. I’ve been your husband
seven years, and it seems as if I was only married yesterday. On
my word. No, you really are a wonderful woman. I’m satisfied, I’m
satisfied, I’m satisfied!

MASHA. I’m bored, I’m bored, I’m bored.... [Sits up] But I can’t get it
out of my head.... It’s simply disgraceful. It has been gnawing away at
me... I can’t keep silent. I mean about Andrey.... He has mortgaged this
house with the bank, and his wife has got all the money; but the house
doesn’t belong to him alone, but to the four of us! He ought to know
that, if he’s an honourable man.

KULIGIN. What’s the use, Masha? Andrey is in debt all round; well, let
him do as he pleases.

MASHA. It’s disgraceful, anyway. [Lies down]

KULIGIN. You and I are not poor. I work, take my classes, give private
lessons... I am a plain, honest man... _Omnia mea mecum porto_, as they
say.

MASHA. I don’t want anything, but the unfairness of it disgusts me.
[Pause] You go, Feodor.

KULIGIN. [Kisses her] You’re tired, just rest for half an hour, and I’ll
sit and wait for you. Sleep.... [Going] I’m satisfied, I’m satisfied,
I’m satisfied. [Exit.]

IRINA. Yes, really, our Andrey has grown smaller; how he’s snuffed
out and aged with that woman! He used to want to be a professor, and
yesterday he was boasting that at last he had been made a member of the
district council. He is a member, and Protopopov is chairman.... The
whole town talks and laughs about it, and he alone knows and sees
nothing.... And now everybody’s gone to look at the fire, but he sits
alone in his room and pays no attention, only just plays on his fiddle.
[Nervily] Oh, it’s awful, awful, awful. [Weeps] I can’t, I can’t bear it
any longer!... I can’t, I can’t!... [OLGA comes in and clears up at her
little table. IRINA is sobbing loudly] Throw me out, throw me out, I
can’t bear any more!

OLGA. [Alarmed] What is it, what is it? Dear!

IRINA. [Sobbing] Where? Where has everything gone? Where is it all?
Oh my God, my God! I’ve forgotten everything, everything... I don’t
remember what is the Italian for window or, well, for ceiling... I
forget everything, every day I forget it, and life passes and will never
return, and we’ll never go away to Moscow... I see that we’ll never
go....

OLGA. Dear, dear....

IRINA. [Controlling herself] Oh, I am unhappy... I can’t work, I shan’t
work. Enough, enough! I used to be a telegraphist, now I work at the
town council offices, and I have nothing but hate and contempt for all
they give me to do... I am already twenty-three, I have already been
at work for a long while, and my brain has dried up, and I’ve grown
thinner, plainer, older, and there is no relief of any sort, and time
goes and it seems all the while as if I am going away from the real, the
beautiful life, farther and farther away, down some precipice. I’m in
despair and I can’t understand how it is that I am still alive, that I
haven’t killed myself.

OLGA. Don’t cry, dear girl, don’t cry... I suffer, too.

IRINA. I’m not crying, not crying.... Enough.... Look, I’m not crying
any more. Enough... enough!

OLGA. Dear, I tell you as a sister and a friend if you want my advice,
marry the Baron. [IRINA cries softly] You respect him, you think highly
of him.... It is true that he is not handsome, but he is so honourable
and clean... people don’t marry from love, but in order to do one’s
duty. I think so, at any rate, and I’d marry without being in love.
Whoever he was, I should marry him, so long as he was a decent man. Even
if he was old....

IRINA. I was always waiting until we should be settled in Moscow, there
I should meet my true love; I used to think about him, and love him....
But it’s all turned out to be nonsense, all nonsense....

OLGA. [Embraces her sister] My dear, beautiful sister, I understand
everything; when Baron Nicolai Lvovitch left the army and came to us in
evening dress, [Note: I.e. in the correct dress for making a proposal of
marriage.] he seemed so bad-looking to me that I even started crying....
He asked, “What are you crying for?” How could I tell him! But if God
brought him to marry you, I should be happy. That would be different,
quite different.

[NATASHA with a candle walks across the stage from right to left without
saying anything.]

MASHA. [Sitting up] She walks as if she’s set something on fire.

OLGA. Masha, you’re silly, you’re the silliest of the family. Please
forgive me for saying so. [Pause.]

MASHA. I want to make a confession, dear sisters. My soul is in pain.
I will confess to you, and never again to anybody... I’ll tell you this
minute. [Softly] It’s my secret but you must know everything... I can’t
be silent.... [Pause] I love, I love... I love that man.... You saw him
only just now.... Why don’t I say it... in one word. I love Vershinin.

OLGA. [Goes behind her screen] Stop that, I don’t hear you in any case.

MASHA. What am I to do? [Takes her head in her hands] First he seemed
queer to me, then I was sorry for him... then I fell in love with
him... fell in love with his voice, his words, his misfortunes, his two
daughters.

OLGA. [Behind the screen] I’m not listening. You may talk any nonsense
you like, it will be all the same, I shan’t hear.

MASHA. Oh, Olga, you are foolish. I am in love--that means that is to be
my fate. It means that is to be my lot.... And he loves me.... It is all
awful. Yes; it isn’t good, is it? [Takes IRINA’S hand and draws her to
her] Oh, my dear.... How are we going to live through our lives, what is
to become of us.... When you read a novel it all seems so old and easy,
but when you fall in love yourself, then you learn that nobody knows
anything, and each must decide for himself.... My dear ones, my
sisters... I’ve confessed, now I shall keep silence.... Like the
lunatics in Gogol’s story, I’m going to be silent... silent...

[ANDREY enters, followed by FERAPONT.]

ANDREY. [Angrily] What do you want? I don’t understand.

FERAPONT. [At the door, impatiently] I’ve already told you ten times,
Andrey Sergeyevitch.

ANDREY. In the first place I’m not Andrey Sergeyevitch, but sir. [Note:
Quite literally, “your high honour,” to correspond to Andrey’s rank as a
civil servant.]

FERAPONT. The firemen, sir, ask if they can go across your garden to the
river. Else they go right round, right round; it’s a nuisance.

ANDREY. All right. Tell them it’s all right. [Exit FERAPONT] I’m tired
of them. Where is Olga? [OLGA comes out from behind the screen] I came
to you for the key of the cupboard. I lost my own. You’ve got a little
key. [OLGA gives him the key; IRINA goes behind her screen; pause] What
a huge fire! It’s going down now. Hang it all, that Ferapont made me so
angry that I talked nonsense to him.... Sir, indeed.... [A pause] Why
are you so silent, Olga? [Pause] It’s time you stopped all that nonsense
and behaved as if you were properly alive.... You are here, Masha.
Irina is here, well, since we’re all here, let’s come to a complete
understanding, once and for all. What have you against me? What is it?

OLGA. Please don’t, Audrey dear. We’ll talk to-morrow. [Excited] What an
awful night!

ANDREY. [Much confused] Don’t excite yourself. I ask you in perfect
calmness; what have you against me? Tell me straight.

VERSHININ’S VOICE. Trum-tum-tum!

MASHA. [Stands; loudly] Tra-ta-ta! [To OLGA] Goodbye, Olga, God bless
you. [Goes behind screen and kisses IRINA] Sleep well.... Good-bye,
Andrey. Go away now, they’re tired... you can explain to-morrow....
[Exit.]

ANDREY. I’ll only say this and go. Just now.... In the first place,
you’ve got something against Natasha, my wife; I’ve noticed it since
the very day of my marriage. Natasha is a beautiful and honest creature,
straight and honourable--that’s my opinion. I love and respect my wife;
understand it, I respect her, and I insist that others should respect
her too. I repeat, she’s an honest and honourable person, and all your
disapproval is simply silly... [Pause] In the second place, you seem to
be annoyed because I am not a professor, and am not engaged in study.
But I work for the zemstvo, I am a member of the district council, and
I consider my service as worthy and as high as the service of science.
I am a member of the district council, and I am proud of it, if you want
to know. [Pause] In the third place, I have still this to say... that I
have mortgaged the house without obtaining your permission.... For that
I am to blame, and ask to be forgiven. My debts led me into doing it...
thirty-five thousand... I do not play at cards any more, I stopped long
ago, but the chief thing I have to say in my defence is that you girls
receive a pension, and I don’t... my wages, so to speak.... [Pause.]

KULIGIN. [At the door] Is Masha there? [Excitedly] Where is she? It’s
queer.... [Exit.]

ANDREY. They don’t hear. Natasha is a splendid, honest person. [Walks
about in silence, then stops] When I married I thought we should be
happy... all of us.... But, my God.... [Weeps] My dear, dear sisters,
don’t believe me, don’t believe me.... [Exit.]

[Fire-alarm. The stage is clear.]

IRINA. [behind her screen] Olga, who’s knocking on the floor?

OLGA. It’s doctor Ivan Romanovitch. He’s drunk.

IRINA. What a restless night! [Pause] Olga! [Looks out] Did you hear?
They are taking the brigade away from us; it’s going to be transferred
to some place far away.

OLGA. It’s only a rumour.

IRINA. Then we shall be left alone.... Olga!

OLGA. Well?

IRINA. My dear, darling sister, I esteem, I highly value the Baron, he’s
a splendid man; I’ll marry him, I’ll consent, only let’s go to Moscow!
I implore you, let’s go! There’s nothing better than Moscow on earth!
Let’s go, Olga, let’s go!

Curtain




ACT IV

[The old garden at the house of the PROSOROVS. There is a long avenue
of firs, at the end of which the river can be seen. There is a forest
on the far side of the river. On the right is the terrace of the house:
bottles and tumblers are on a table here; it is evident that champagne
has just been drunk. It is midday. Every now and again passers-by walk
across the garden, from the road to the river; five soldiers go past
rapidly. CHEBUTIKIN, in a comfortable frame of mind which does not
desert him throughout the act, sits in an armchair in the garden,
waiting to be called. He wears a peaked cap and has a stick. IRINA,
KULIGIN with a cross hanging from his neck and without his moustaches,
and TUZENBACH are standing on the terrace seeing off FEDOTIK and RODE,
who are coming down into the garden; both officers are in service
uniform.]

TUZENBACH. [Exchanges kisses with FEDOTIK] You’re a good sort, we got on
so well together. [Exchanges kisses with RODE] Once again.... Good-bye,
old man!

IRINA. Au revoir!

FEDOTIK. It isn’t au revoir, it’s good-bye; we’ll never meet again!

KULIGIN. Who knows! [Wipes his eyes; smiles] Here I’ve started crying!

IRINA. We’ll meet again sometime.

FEDOTIK. After ten years--or fifteen? We’ll hardly know one another
then; we’ll say, “How do you do?” coldly.... [Takes a snapshot] Keep
still.... Once more, for the last time.

RODE. [Embracing TUZENBACH] We shan’t meet again.... [Kisses IRINA’S
hand] Thank you for everything, for everything!

FEDOTIK. [Grieved] Don’t be in such a hurry!

TUZENBACH. We shall meet again, if God wills it. Write to us. Be sure to
write.

RODE. [Looking round the garden] Good-bye, trees! [Shouts] Yo-ho!
[Pause] Good-bye, echo!

KULIGIN. Best wishes. Go and get yourselves wives there in Poland....
Your Polish wife will clasp you and call you “kochanku!” [Note:
Darling.] [Laughs.]

FEDOTIK. [Looking at the time] There’s less than an hour left. Soleni
is the only one of our battery who is going on the barge; the rest of
us are going with the main body. Three batteries are leaving to-day,
another three to-morrow and then the town will be quiet and peaceful.

TUZENBACH. And terribly dull.

RODE. And where is Maria Sergeyevna?

KULIGIN. Masha is in the garden.

FEDOTIK. We’d like to say good-bye to her.

RODE. Good-bye, I must go, or else I’ll start weeping.... [Quickly
embraces KULIGIN and TUZENBACH, and kisses IRINA’S hand] We’ve been so
happy here....

FEDOTIK. [To KULIGIN] Here’s a keepsake for you... a note-book with a
pencil.... We’ll go to the river from here.... [They go aside and both
look round.]

RODE. [Shouts] Yo-ho!

KULIGIN. [Shouts] Good-bye!

[At the back of the stage FEDOTIK and RODE meet MASHA; they say good-bye
and go out with her.]

IRINA. They’ve gone.... [Sits on the bottom step of the terrace.]

CHEBUTIKIN. And they forgot to say good-bye to me.

IRINA. But why is that?

CHEBUTIKIN. I just forgot, somehow. Though I’ll soon see them again, I’m
going to-morrow. Yes... just one day left. I shall be retired in a year,
then I’ll come here again, and finish my life near you. I’ve only one
year before I get my pension.... [Puts one newspaper into his pocket and
takes another out] I’ll come here to you and change my life radically...
I’ll be so quiet... so agree... agreeable, respectable....

IRINA. Yes, you ought to change your life, dear man, somehow or other.

CHEBUTIKIN. Yes, I feel it. [Sings softly.]    “Tarara-boom-deay....”

KULIGIN. We won’t reform Ivan Romanovitch! We won’t reform him!

CHEBUTIKIN. If only I was apprenticed to you! Then I’d reform.

IRINA. Feodor has shaved his moustache! I can’t bear to look at him.

KULIGIN. Well, what about it?

CHEBUTIKIN. I could tell you what your face looks like now, but it
wouldn’t be polite.

KULIGIN. Well! It’s the custom, it’s modus vivendi. Our Director is
clean-shaven, and so I too, when I received my inspectorship, had
my moustaches removed. Nobody likes it, but it’s all one to me. I’m
satisfied. Whether I’ve got moustaches or not, I’m satisfied.... [Sits.]

[At the back of the stage ANDREY is wheeling a perambulator containing a
sleeping infant.]

IRINA. Ivan Romanovitch, be a darling. I’m awfully worried. You were out
on the boulevard last night; tell me, what happened?

CHEBUTIKIN. What happened? Nothing. Quite a trifling matter. [Reads
paper] Of no importance!

KULIGIN. They say that Soleni and the Baron met yesterday on the
boulevard near the theatre....

TUZENBACH. Stop! What right... [Waves his hand and goes into the house.]

KULIGIN. Near the theatre... Soleni started behaving offensively to the
Baron, who lost his temper and said something nasty....

CHEBUTIKIN. I don’t know. It’s all bunkum.

KULIGIN. At some seminary or other a master wrote “bunkum” on an essay,
and the student couldn’t make the letters out--thought it was a Latin
word “luckum.” [Laughs] Awfully funny, that. They say that Soleni is in
love with Irina and hates the Baron.... That’s quite natural. Irina is
a very nice girl. She’s even like Masha, she’s so thoughtful.... Only,
Irina your character is gentler. Though Masha’s character, too, is a
very good one. I’m very fond of Masha. [Shouts of “Yo-ho!” are heard
behind the stage.]

IRINA. [Shudders] Everything seems to frighten me today. [Pause] I’ve
got everything ready, and I send my things off after dinner. The
Baron and I will be married to-morrow, and to-morrow we go away to
the brickworks, and the next day I go to the school, and the new life
begins. God will help me! When I took my examination for the teacher’s
post, I actually wept for joy and gratitude.... [Pause] The cart will be
here in a minute for my things....

KULIGIN. Somehow or other, all this doesn’t seem at all serious. As if
it was all ideas, and nothing really serious. Still, with all my soul I
wish you happiness.

CHEBUTIKIN. [With deep feeling] My splendid... my dear, precious
girl.... You’ve gone on far ahead, I won’t catch up with you. I’m left
behind like a migrant bird grown old, and unable to fly. Fly, my
dear, fly, and God be with you! [Pause] It’s a pity you shaved your
moustaches, Feodor Ilitch.

KULIGIN. Oh, drop it! [Sighs] To-day the soldiers will be gone, and
everything will go on as in the old days. Say what you will, Masha is
a good, honest woman. I love her very much, and thank my fate for her.
People have such different fates. There’s a Kosirev who works in the
excise department here. He was at school with me; he was expelled
from the fifth class of the High School for being entirely unable to
understand _ut consecutivum_. He’s awfully hard up now and in very
poor health, and when I meet him I say to him, “How do you do, _ut
consecutivum_.” “Yes,” he says, “precisely _consecutivum_...” and
coughs. But I’ve been successful all my life, I’m happy, and I even have
a Stanislaus Cross, of the second class, and now I myself teach others
that _ut consecutivum_. Of course, I’m a clever man, much cleverer than
many, but happiness doesn’t only lie in that....

[“The Maiden’s Prayer” is being played on the piano in the house.]

IRINA. To-morrow night I shan’t hear that “Maiden’s Prayer” any more,
and I shan’t be meeting Protopopov.... [Pause] Protopopov is sitting
there in the drawing-room; and he came to-day...

KULIGIN. Hasn’t the head-mistress come yet?

IRINA. No. She has been sent for. If you only knew how difficult it is
for me to live alone, without Olga.... She lives at the High School;
she, a head-mistress, busy all day with her affairs and I’m alone,
bored, with nothing to do, and hate the room I live in.... I’ve made
up my mind: if I can’t live in Moscow, then it must come to this. It’s
fate. It can’t be helped. It’s all the will of God, that’s the truth.
Nicolai Lvovitch made me a proposal.... Well? I thought it over and made
up my mind. He’s a good man... it’s quite remarkable how good he is....
And suddenly my soul put out wings, I became happy, and light-hearted,
and once again the desire for work, work, came over me.... Only
something happened yesterday, some secret dread has been hanging over
me....

CHEBUTIKIN. Luckum. Rubbish.

NATASHA. [At the window] The head-mistress.

KULIGIN. The head-mistress has come. Let’s go. [Exit with IRINA into the
house.]

CHEBUTIKIN. “It is my washing day.... Tara-ra... boom-deay.”

[MASHA approaches, ANDREY is wheeling a perambulator at the back.]

MASHA. Here you are, sitting here, doing nothing.

CHEBUTIKIN. What then?

MASHA. [Sits] Nothing.... [Pause] Did you love my mother?

CHEBUTIKIN. Very much.

MASHA. And did she love you?

CHEBUTIKIN. [After a pause] I don’t remember that.

MASHA. Is my man here? When our cook Martha used to ask about her
gendarme, she used to say my man. Is he here?

CHEBUTIKIN. Not yet.

MASHA. When you take your happiness in little bits, in snatches, and
then lose it, as I have done, you gradually get coarser, more bitter.
[Points to her bosom] I’m boiling in here.... [Looks at ANDREY with the
perambulator] There’s our brother Andrey.... All our hopes in him have
gone. There was once a great bell, a thousand persons were hoisting it,
much money and labour had been spent on it, when it suddenly fell
and was broken. Suddenly, for no particular reason.... Andrey is like
that....

ANDREY. When are they going to stop making such a noise in the house?
It’s awful.

CHEBUTIKIN. They won’t be much longer. [Looks at his watch] My watch is
very old-fashioned, it strikes the hours.... [Winds the watch and makes
it strike] The first, second, and fifth batteries are to leave at one
o’clock precisely. [Pause] And I go to-morrow.

ANDREY. For good?

CHEBUTIKIN. I don’t know. Perhaps I’ll return in a year. The devil
only knows... it’s all one.... [Somewhere a harp and violin are being
played.]

ANDREY. The town will grow empty. It will be as if they put a cover over
it. [Pause] Something happened yesterday by the theatre. The whole town
knows of it, but I don’t.

CHEBUTIKIN. Nothing. A silly little affair. Soleni started irritating
the Baron, who lost his temper and insulted him, and so at last Soleni
had to challenge him. [Looks at his watch] It’s about time, I think....
At half-past twelve, in the public wood, that one you can see from here
across the river.... Piff-paff. [Laughs] Soleni thinks he’s Lermontov,
and even writes verses. That’s all very well, but this is his third
duel.

MASHA. Whose?

CHEBUTIKIN. Soleni’s.

MASHA. And the Baron?

CHEBUTIKIN. What about the Baron? [Pause.]

MASHA. Everything’s all muddled up in my head.... But I say it ought not
to be allowed. He might wound the Baron or even kill him.

CHEBUTIKIN. The Baron is a good man, but one Baron more or less--what
difference does it make? It’s all the same! [Beyond the garden somebody
shouts “Co-ee! Hallo! “] You wait. That’s Skvortsov shouting; one of the
seconds. He’s in a boat. [Pause.]

ANDREY. In my opinion it’s simply immoral to fight in a duel, or to be
present, even in the quality of a doctor.

CHEBUTIKIN. It only seems so.... We don’t exist, there’s nothing on
earth, we don’t really live, it only seems that we live. Does it matter,
anyway!

MASHA. You talk and talk the whole day long. [Going] You live in
a climate like this, where it might snow any moment, and there you
talk.... [Stops] I won’t go into the house, I can’t go there.... Tell me
when Vershinin comes.... [Goes along the avenue] The migrant birds are
already on the wing.... [Looks up] Swans or geese.... My dear, happy
things.... [Exit.]

ANDREY. Our house will be empty. The officers will go away, you are
going, my sister is getting married, and I alone will remain in the
house.

CHEBUTIKIN. And your wife?

[FERAPONT enters with some documents.]

ANDREY. A wife’s a wife. She’s honest, well-bred, yes; and kind, but
with all that there is still something about her that degenerates her
into a petty, blind, even in some respects misshapen animal. In any
case, she isn’t a man. I tell you as a friend, as the only man to whom I
can lay bare my soul. I love Natasha, it’s true, but sometimes she seems
extraordinarily vulgar, and then I lose myself and can’t understand why
I love her so much, or, at any rate, used to love her....

CHEBUTIKIN. [Rises] I’m going away to-morrow, old chap, and perhaps
we’ll never meet again, so here’s my advice. Put on your cap, take a
stick in your hand, go... go on and on, without looking round. And the
farther you go, the better.

[SOLENI goes across the back of the stage with two officers; he catches
sight of CHEBUTIKIN, and turns to him, the officers go on.]

SOLENI. Doctor, it’s time. It’s half-past twelve already. [Shakes hands
with ANDREY.]

CHEBUTIKIN. Half a minute. I’m tired of the lot of you. [To ANDREY] If
anybody asks for me, say I’ll be back soon.... [Sighs] Oh, oh, oh!

SOLENI. “He didn’t have the time to sigh. The bear sat on him heavily.”
 [Goes up to him] What are you groaning about, old man?

CHEBUTIKIN. Stop it!

SOLENI. How’s your health?

CHEBUTIKIN. [Angry] Mind your own business.

SOLENI. The old man is unnecessarily excited. I won’t go far, I’ll only
just bring him down like a snipe. [Takes out his scent-bottle and scents
his hands] I’ve poured out a whole bottle of scent to-day and they still
smell... of a dead body. [Pause] Yes.... You remember the poem

    “But he, the rebel seeks the storm,
     As if the storm will bring him rest...”?

CHEBUTIKIN. Yes.

    “He didn’t have the time to sigh,
     The bear sat on him heavily.”

[Exit with SOLENI.]

[Shouts are heard. ANDREY and FERAPONT come in.]

FERAPONT. Documents to sign....

ANDREY. [Irritated]. Go away! Leave me! Please! [Goes away with the
perambulator.]

FERAPONT. That’s what documents are for, to be signed. [Retires to back
of stage.]

[Enter IRINA, with TUZENBACH in a straw hat; KULIGIN walks across the
stage, shouting “Co-ee, Masha, co-ee!”]

TUZENBACH. He seems to be the only man in the town who is glad that the
soldiers are going.

IRINA. One can understand that. [Pause] The town will be empty.

TUZENBACH. My dear, I shall return soon.

IRINA. Where are you going?

TUZENBACH. I must go into the town and then... see the others off.

IRINA. It’s not true... Nicolai, why are you so absentminded to-day?
[Pause] What took place by the theatre yesterday?

TUZENBACH. [Making a movement of impatience] In an hour’s time I shall
return and be with you again. [Kisses her hands] My darling... [Looking
her closely in the face] it’s five years now since I fell in love with
you, and still I can’t get used to it, and you seem to me to grow more
and more beautiful. What lovely, wonderful hair! What eyes! I’m going to
take you away to-morrow. We shall work, we shall be rich, my dreams will
come true. You will be happy. There’s only one thing, one thing only:
you don’t love me!

IRINA. It isn’t in my power! I shall be your wife, I shall be true to
you, and obedient to you, but I can’t love you. What can I do! [Cries] I
have never been in love in my life. Oh, I used to think so much of love,
I have been thinking about it for so long by day and by night, but
my soul is like an expensive piano which is locked and the key lost.
[Pause] You seem so unhappy.

TUZENBACH. I didn’t sleep at night. There is nothing in my life so awful
as to be able to frighten me, only that lost key torments my soul and
does not let me sleep. Say something to me [Pause] say something to
me....

IRINA. What can I say, what?

TUZENBACH. Anything.

IRINA. Don’t! don’t! [Pause.]

TUZENBACH. It is curious how silly trivial little things, sometimes
for no apparent reason, become significant. At first you laugh at these
things, you think they are of no importance, you go on and you feel that
you haven’t got the strength to stop yourself. Oh don’t let’s talk about
it! I am happy. It is as if for the first time in my life I see these
firs, maples, beeches, and they all look at me inquisitively and wait.
What beautiful trees and how beautiful, when one comes to think of it,
life must be near them! [A shout of Co-ee! in the distance] It’s time
I went.... There’s a tree which has dried up but it still sways in the
breeze with the others. And so it seems to me that if I die, I shall
still take part in life in one way or another. Good-bye, dear....
[Kisses her hands] The papers which you gave me are on my table under
the calendar.

IRINA. I am coming with you.

TUZENBACH. [Nervously] No, no! [He goes quickly and stops in the avenue]
Irina!

IRINA. What is it?

TUZENBACH. [Not knowing what to say] I haven’t had any coffee to-day.
Tell them to make me some.... [He goes out quickly.]

[IRINA stands deep in thought. Then she goes to the back of the stage
and sits on a swing. ANDREY comes in with the perambulator and FERAPONT
also appears.]

FERAPONT. Andrey Sergeyevitch, it isn’t as if the documents were mine,
they are the government’s. I didn’t make them.

ANDREY. Oh, what has become of my past and where is it? I used to be
young, happy, clever, I used to be able to think and frame clever ideas,
the present and the future seemed to me full of hope. Why do we, almost
before we have begun to live, become dull, grey, uninteresting, lazy,
apathetic, useless, unhappy.... This town has already been in existence
for two hundred years and it has a hundred thousand inhabitants, not one
of whom is in any way different from the others. There has never been,
now or at any other time, a single leader of men, a single scholar, an
artist, a man of even the slightest eminence who might arouse envy or a
passionate desire to be imitated. They only eat, drink, sleep, and then
they die... more people are born and also eat, drink, sleep, and so
as not to go silly from boredom, they try to make life many-sided
with their beastly backbiting, vodka, cards, and litigation. The wives
deceive their husbands, and the husbands lie, and pretend they see
nothing and hear nothing, and the evil influence irresistibly oppresses
the children and the divine spark in them is extinguished, and they
become just as pitiful corpses and just as much like one another as
their fathers and mothers.... [Angrily to FERAPONT] What do you want?

FERAPONT. What? Documents want signing.

ANDREY. I’m tired of you.

FERAPONT. [Handing him papers] The hall-porter from the law courts was
saying just now that in the winter there were two hundred degrees of
frost in Petersburg.

ANDREY. The present is beastly, but when I think of the future, how good
it is! I feel so light, so free; there is a light in the distance, I see
freedom. I see myself and my children freeing ourselves from vanities,
from kvass, from goose baked with cabbage, from after-dinner naps, from
base idleness....

FERAPONT. He was saying that two thousand people were frozen to death.
The people were frightened, he said. In Petersburg or Moscow, I don’t
remember which.

ANDREY. [Overcome by a tender emotion] My dear sisters, my beautiful
sisters! [Crying] Masha, my sister....

NATASHA. [At the window] Who’s talking so loudly out here? Is that you,
Andrey? You’ll wake little Sophie. _Il ne faut pas faire du bruit, la
Sophie est dormée deja. Vous êtes un ours._ [Angrily] If you want
to talk, then give the perambulator and the baby to somebody else.
Ferapont, take the perambulator!

FERAPONT. Yes’m. [Takes the perambulator.]

ANDREY. [Confused] I’m speaking quietly.

NATASHA. [At the window, nursing her boy] Bobby! Naughty Bobby! Bad
little Bobby!

ANDREY. [Looking through the papers] All right, I’ll look them over and
sign if necessary, and you can take them back to the offices....

[Goes into house reading papers; FERAPONT takes the perambulator to the
back of the garden.]

NATASHA. [At the window] Bobby, what’s your mother’s name? Dear, dear!
And who’s this? That’s Aunt Olga. Say to your aunt, “How do you do,
Olga!”

[Two wandering musicians, a man and a girl, are playing on a violin and
a harp. VERSHININ, OLGA, and ANFISA come out of the house and listen for
a minute in silence; IRINA comes up to them.]

OLGA. Our garden might be a public thoroughfare, from the way people
walk and ride across it. Nurse, give those musicians something!

ANFISA. [Gives money to the musicians] Go away with God’s blessing on
you. [The musicians bow and go away] A bitter sort of people. You don’t
play on a full stomach. [To IRINA] How do you do, Arisha! [Kisses her]
Well, little girl, here I am, still alive! Still alive! In the High
School, together with little Olga, in her official apartments... so the
Lord has appointed for my old age. Sinful woman that I am, I’ve never
lived like that in my life before.... A large flat, government property,
and I’ve a whole room and bed to myself. All government property. I wake
up at nights and, oh God, and Holy Mother, there isn’t a happier person
than I!

VERSHININ. [Looks at his watch] We are going soon, Olga Sergeyevna. It’s
time for me to go. [Pause] I wish you every... every.... Where’s Maria
Sergeyevna?

IRINA. She’s somewhere in the garden. I’ll go and look for her.

VERSHININ. If you’ll be so kind. I haven’t time.

ANFISA. I’ll go and look, too. [Shouts] Little Masha, co-ee! [Goes out
with IRINA down into the garden] Co-ee, co-ee!

VERSHININ. Everything comes to an end. And so we, too, must part. [Looks
at his watch] The town gave us a sort of farewell breakfast, we had
champagne to drink and the mayor made a speech, and I ate and listened,
but my soul was here all the time.... [Looks round the garden] I’m so
used to you now.

OLGA. Shall we ever meet again?

VERSHININ. Probably not. [Pause] My wife and both my daughters will stay
here another two months. If anything happens, or if anything has to be
done...

OLGA. Yes, yes, of course. You need not worry. [Pause] To-morrow there
won’t be a single soldier left in the town, it will all be a memory,
and, of course, for us a new life will begin.... [Pause] None of our
plans are coming right. I didn’t want to be a head-mistress, but they
made me one, all the same. It means there’s no chance of Moscow....

VERSHININ. Well... thank you for everything. Forgive me if I’ve... I’ve
said such an awful lot--forgive me for that too, don’t think badly of
me.

OLGA. [Wipes her eyes] Why isn’t Masha coming...

VERSHININ. What else can I say in parting? Can I philosophize about
anything? [Laughs] Life is heavy. To many of us it seems dull and
hopeless, but still, it must be acknowledged that it is getting lighter
and clearer, and it seems that the time is not far off when it will be
quite clear. [Looks at his watch] It’s time I went! Mankind used to
be absorbed in wars, and all its existence was filled with campaigns,
attacks, defeats, now we’ve outlived all that, leaving after us a great
waste place, which there is nothing to fill with at present; but mankind
is looking for something, and will certainly find it. Oh, if it only
happened more quickly. [Pause] If only education could be added to
industry, and industry to education. [Looks at his watch] It’s time I
went....

OLGA. Here she comes.

[Enter MASHA.]

VERSHININ. I came to say good-bye....

[OLGA steps aside a little, so as not to be in their way.]

MASHA. [Looking him in the face] Good-bye. [Prolonged kiss.]

OLGA. Don’t, don’t. [MASHA is crying bitterly]

VERSHININ. Write to me.... Don’t forget! Let me go.... It’s time. Take
her, Olga Sergeyevna... it’s time... I’m late...

[He kisses OLGA’S hand in evident emotion, then embraces MASHA once more
and goes out quickly.]

OLGA. Don’t, Masha! Stop, dear.... [KULIGIN enters.]

KULIGIN. [Confused] Never mind, let her cry, let her.... My dear Masha,
my good Masha.... You’re my wife, and I’m happy, whatever happens... I’m
not complaining, I don’t reproach you at all.... Olga is a witness to
it. Let’s begin to live again as we used to, and not by a single word,
or hint...

MASHA. [Restraining her sobs]    “There stands a green oak by the sea,
     And a chain of bright gold is around it....
     And a chain of bright gold is around it....”

I’m going off my head... “There stands... a green oak... by the sea.”...

OLGA. Don’t, Masha, don’t... give her some water....

MASHA. I’m not crying any more....

KULIGIN. She’s not crying any more... she’s a good... [A shot is heard
from a distance.]

MASHA.    “There stands a green oak by the sea,
     And a chain of bright gold is around it...
     An oak of green gold....”

I’m mixing it up.... [Drinks some water] Life is dull... I don’t want
anything more now... I’ll be all right in a moment.... It doesn’t
matter.... What do those lines mean? Why do they run in my head? My
thoughts are all tangled.

[IRINA enters.]

OLGA. Be quiet, Masha. There’s a good girl.... Let’s go in.

MASHA. [Angrily] I shan’t go in there. [Sobs, but controls herself at
once] I’m not going to go into the house, I won’t go....

IRINA. Let’s sit here together and say nothing. I’m going away
to-morrow.... [Pause.]

KULIGIN. Yesterday I took away these whiskers and this beard from a boy
in the third class.... [He puts on the whiskers and beard] Don’t I look
like the German master.... [Laughs] Don’t I? The boys are amusing.

MASHA. You really do look like that German of yours.

OLGA. [Laughs] Yes. [MASHA weeps.]

IRINA. Don’t, Masha!

KULIGIN. It’s a very good likeness....

[Enter NATASHA.]

NATASHA. [To the maid] What? Mihail Ivanitch Protopopov will sit with
little Sophie, and Andrey Sergeyevitch can take little Bobby out.
Children are such a bother.... [To IRINA] Irina, it’s such a pity you’re
going away to-morrow. Do stop just another week. [Sees KULIGIN and
screams; he laughs and takes off his beard and whiskers] How you
frightened me! [To IRINA] I’ve grown used to you and do you think it
will be easy for me to part from you? I’m going to have Andrey and his
violin put into your room--let him fiddle away in there!--and we’ll put
little Sophie into his room. The beautiful, lovely child! What a little
girlie! To-day she looked at me with such pretty eyes and said “Mamma!”

KULIGIN. A beautiful child, it’s quite true.

NATASHA. That means I shall have the place to myself to-morrow. [Sighs]
In the first place I shall have that avenue of fir-trees cut down, then
that maple. It’s so ugly at nights.... [To IRINA] That belt doesn’t suit
you at all, dear.... It’s an error of taste. And I’ll give orders to
have lots and lots of little flowers planted here, and they’ll smell....
[Severely] Why is there a fork lying about here on the seat? [Going
towards the house, to the maid] Why is there a fork lying about here on
the seat, I say? [Shouts] Don’t you dare to answer me!

KULIGIN. Temper! temper! [A march is played off; they all listen.]

OLGA. They’re going.

[CHEBUTIKIN comes in.]

MASHA. They’re going. Well, well.... Bon voyage! [To her husband] We
must be going home.... Where’s my coat and hat?

KULIGIN. I took them in... I’ll bring them, in a moment.

OLGA. Yes, now we can all go home. It’s time.

CHEBUTIKIN. Olga Sergeyevna!

OLGA. What is it? [Pause] What is it?

CHEBUTIKIN. Nothing... I don’t know how to tell you.... [Whispers to
her.]

OLGA. [Frightened] It can’t be true!

CHEBUTIKIN. Yes... such a story... I’m tired out, exhausted, I won’t say
any more.... [Sadly] Still, it’s all the same!

MASHA. What’s happened?

OLGA. [Embraces IRINA] This is a terrible day... I don’t know how to
tell you, dear....

IRINA. What is it? Tell me quickly, what is it? For God’s sake! [Cries.]

CHEBUTIKIN. The Baron was killed in the duel just now.

IRINA. [Cries softly] I knew it, I knew it....

CHEBUTIKIN. [Sits on a bench at the back of the stage] I’m tired....
[Takes a paper from his pocket] Let ‘em cry.... [Sings softly]
“Tarara-boom-deay, it is my washing day....” Isn’t it all the same!

[The three sisters are standing, pressing against one another.]

MASHA. Oh, how the music plays! They are leaving us, one has quite left
us, quite and for ever. We remain alone, to begin our life over again.
We must live... we must live....

IRINA. [Puts her head on OLGA’s bosom] There will come a time when
everybody will know why, for what purpose, there is all this suffering,
and there will be no more mysteries. But now we must live... we must
work, just work! To-morrow, I’ll go away alone, and I’ll teach and give
my whole life to those who, perhaps, need it. It’s autumn now, soon it
will be winter, the snow will cover everything, and I shall be working,
working....

OLGA. [Embraces both her sisters] The bands are playing so gaily, so
bravely, and one does so want to live! Oh, my God! Time will pass on,
and we shall depart for ever, we shall be forgotten; they will
forget our faces, voices, and even how many there were of us, but
our sufferings will turn into joy for those who will live after us,
happiness and peace will reign on earth, and people will remember with
kindly words, and bless those who are living now. Oh dear sisters, our
life is not yet at an end. Let us live. The music is so gay, so joyful,
and, it seems that in a little while we shall know why we are living,
why we are suffering.... If we could only know, if we could only know!

[The music has been growing softer and softer; KULIGIN, smiling happily,
brings out the hat and coat; ANDREY wheels out the perambulator in which
BOBBY is sitting.]

CHEBUTIKIN. [Sings softly] “Tara... ra-boom-deay.... It is my
washing-day.”... [Reads a paper] It’s all the same! It’s all the same!

OLGA. If only we could know, if only we could know!

ACT ONE


[A room which is still called the nursery. One of the doors leads into
ANYA’S room. It is close on sunrise. It is May. The cherry-trees are
in flower but it is chilly in the garden. There is an early frost.
The windows of the room are shut. DUNYASHA comes in with a candle, and
LOPAKHIN with a book in his hand.]

LOPAKHIN. The train’s arrived, thank God. What’s the time?

DUNYASHA. It will soon be two. [Blows out candle] It is light already.

LOPAKHIN. How much was the train late? Two hours at least. [Yawns and
stretches himself] I have made a rotten mess of it! I came here on
purpose to meet them at the station, and then overslept myself... in my
chair. It’s a pity. I wish you’d wakened me.

DUNYASHA. I thought you’d gone away. [Listening] I think I hear them
coming.

LOPAKHIN. [Listens] No.... They’ve got to collect their luggage and so
on.... [Pause] Lubov Andreyevna has been living abroad for five years;
I don’t know what she’ll be like now.... She’s a good sort--an easy,
simple person. I remember when I was a boy of fifteen, my father, who
is dead--he used to keep a shop in the village here--hit me on the face
with his fist, and my nose bled.... We had gone into the yard together
for something or other, and he was a little drunk. Lubov Andreyevna, as
I remember her now, was still young, and very thin, and she took me to
the washstand here in this very room, the nursery. She said, “Don’t
cry, little man, it’ll be all right in time for your wedding.” [Pause]
“Little man”.... My father was a peasant, it’s true, but here I am in a
white waistcoat and yellow shoes... a pearl out of an oyster. I’m rich
now, with lots of money, but just think about it and examine me, and
you’ll find I’m still a peasant down to the marrow of my bones. [Turns
over the pages of his book] Here I’ve been reading this book, but I
understood nothing. I read and fell asleep. [Pause.]

DUNYASHA. The dogs didn’t sleep all night; they know that they’re
coming.

LOPAKHIN. What’s up with you, Dunyasha...?

DUNYASHA. My hands are shaking. I shall faint.

LOPAKHIN. You’re too sensitive, Dunyasha. You dress just like a lady,
and you do your hair like one too. You oughtn’t. You should know your
place.

EPIKHODOV. [Enters with a bouquet. He wears a short jacket and
brilliantly polished boots which squeak audibly. He drops the bouquet as
he enters, then picks it up] The gardener sent these; says they’re to go
into the dining-room. [Gives the bouquet to DUNYASHA.]

LOPAKHIN. And you’ll bring me some kvass.

DUNYASHA. Very well. [Exit.]

EPIKHODOV. There’s a frost this morning--three degrees, and the
cherry-trees are all in flower. I can’t approve of our climate. [Sighs]
I can’t. Our climate is indisposed to favour us even this once. And,
Ermolai Alexeyevitch, allow me to say to you, in addition, that I bought
myself some boots two days ago, and I beg to assure you that they squeak
in a perfectly unbearable manner. What shall I put on them?

LOPAKHIN. Go away. You bore me.

EPIKHODOV. Some misfortune happens to me every day. But I don’t
complain; I’m used to it, and I can smile. [DUNYASHA comes in and
brings LOPAKHIN some kvass] I shall go. [Knocks over a chair] There....
[Triumphantly] There, you see, if I may use the word, what circumstances
I am in, so to speak. It is even simply marvellous. [Exit.]

DUNYASHA. I may confess to you, Ermolai Alexeyevitch, that Epikhodov has
proposed to me.

LOPAKHIN. Ah!

DUNYASHA. I don’t know what to do about it. He’s a nice young man, but
every now and again, when he begins talking, you can’t understand a word
he’s saying. I think I like him. He’s madly in love with me. He’s an
unlucky man; every day something happens. We tease him about it. They
call him “Two-and-twenty troubles.”

LOPAKHIN. [Listens] There they come, I think.

DUNYASHA. They’re coming! What’s the matter with me? I’m cold all over.

LOPAKHIN. There they are, right enough. Let’s go and meet them. Will she
know me? We haven’t seen each other for five years.

DUNYASHA. [Excited] I shall faint in a minute.... Oh, I’m fainting!

[Two carriages are heard driving up to the house. LOPAKHIN and DUNYASHA
quickly go out. The stage is empty. A noise begins in the next room.
FIERS, leaning on a stick, walks quickly across the stage; he has just
been to meet LUBOV ANDREYEVNA. He wears an old-fashioned livery and a
tall hat. He is saying something to himself, but not a word of it can be
made out. The noise behind the stage gets louder and louder. A voice is
heard: “Let’s go in there.” Enter LUBOV ANDREYEVNA, ANYA, and CHARLOTTA
IVANOVNA with a little dog on a chain, and all dressed in travelling
clothes, VARYA in a long coat and with a kerchief on her head. GAEV,
SIMEONOV-PISCHIN, LOPAKHIN, DUNYASHA with a parcel and an umbrella, and
a servant with luggage--all cross the room.]

ANYA. Let’s come through here. Do you remember what this room is,
mother?

LUBOV. [Joyfully, through her tears] The nursery!

VARYA. How cold it is! My hands are quite numb. [To LUBOV ANDREYEVNA]
Your rooms, the white one and the violet one, are just as they used to
be, mother.

LUBOV. My dear nursery, oh, you beautiful room.... I used to sleep
here when I was a baby. [Weeps] And here I am like a little girl again.
[Kisses her brother, VARYA, then her brother again] And Varya is just as
she used to be, just like a nun. And I knew Dunyasha. [Kisses her.]

GAEV. The train was two hours late. There now; how’s that for
punctuality?

CHARLOTTA. [To PISCHIN] My dog eats nuts too.

PISCHIN. [Astonished] To think of that, now!

[All go out except ANYA and DUNYASHA.]

DUNYASHA. We did have to wait for you!

[Takes off ANYA’S cloak and hat.]

ANYA. I didn’t get any sleep for four nights on the journey.... I’m
awfully cold.

DUNYASHA. You went away during Lent, when it was snowing and frosty, but
now? Darling! [Laughs and kisses her] We did have to wait for you, my
joy, my pet.... I must tell you at once, I can’t bear to wait a minute.

ANYA. [Tired] Something else now...?

DUNYASHA. The clerk, Epikhodov, proposed to me after Easter.

ANYA. Always the same.... [Puts her hair straight] I’ve lost all my
hairpins.... [She is very tired, and even staggers as she walks.]

DUNYASHA. I don’t know what to think about it. He loves me, he loves me
so much!

ANYA. [Looks into her room; in a gentle voice] My room, my windows, as
if I’d never gone away. I’m at home! To-morrow morning I’ll get up and
have a run in the garden....Oh, if I could only get to sleep! I didn’t
sleep the whole journey, I was so bothered.

DUNYASHA. Peter Sergeyevitch came two days ago.

ANYA. [Joyfully] Peter!

DUNYASHA. He sleeps in the bath-house, he lives there. He said he was
afraid he’d be in the way. [Looks at her pocket-watch] I ought to wake
him, but Barbara Mihailovna told me not to. “Don’t wake him,” she said.

[Enter VARYA, a bunch of keys on her belt.]

VARYA. Dunyasha, some coffee, quick. Mother wants some.

DUNYASHA. This minute. [Exit.]

VARYA. Well, you’ve come, glory be to God. Home again. [Caressing her]
My darling is back again! My pretty one is back again!

ANYA. I did have an awful time, I tell you.

VARYA. I can just imagine it!

ANYA. I went away in Holy Week; it was very cold then. Charlotta talked
the whole way and would go on performing her tricks. Why did you tie
Charlotta on to me?

VARYA. You couldn’t go alone, darling, at seventeen!

ANYA. We went to Paris; it’s cold there and snowing. I talk French
perfectly horribly. My mother lives on the fifth floor. I go to her, and
find her there with various Frenchmen, women, an old abbé with a book,
and everything in tobacco smoke and with no comfort at all. I suddenly
became very sorry for mother--so sorry that I took her head in my arms
and hugged her and wouldn’t let her go. Then mother started hugging me
and crying....

VARYA. [Weeping] Don’t say any more, don’t say any more....

ANYA. She’s already sold her villa near Mentone; she’s nothing left,
nothing. And I haven’t a copeck left either; we only just managed to get
here. And mother won’t understand! We had dinner at a station; she asked
for all the expensive things, and tipped the waiters one rouble each.
And Charlotta too. Yasha wants his share too--it’s too bad. Mother’s got
a footman now, Yasha; we’ve brought him here.

VARYA. I saw the wretch.

ANYA. How’s business? Has the interest been paid?

VARYA. Not much chance of that.

ANYA. Oh God, oh God...

VARYA. The place will be sold in August.

ANYA. O God....

LOPAKHIN. [Looks in at the door and moos] Moo!... [Exit.]

VARYA. [Through her tears] I’d like to.... [Shakes her fist.]

ANYA. [Embraces VARYA, softly] Varya, has he proposed to you? [VARYA
shakes head] But he loves you.... Why don’t you make up your minds? Why
do you keep on waiting?

VARYA. I think that it will all come to nothing. He’s a busy man. I’m
not his affair... he pays no attention to me. Bless the man, I don’t
want to see him.... But everybody talks about our marriage, everybody
congratulates me, and there’s nothing in it at all, it’s all like a
dream. [In another tone] You’ve got a brooch like a bee.

ANYA. [Sadly] Mother bought it. [Goes into her room, and talks lightly,
like a child] In Paris I went up in a balloon!

VARYA. My darling’s come back, my pretty one’s come back! [DUNYASHA has
already returned with the coffee-pot and is making the coffee, VARYA
stands near the door] I go about all day, looking after the house, and
I think all the time, if only you could marry a rich man, then I’d be
happy and would go away somewhere by myself, then to Kiev... to Moscow,
and so on, from one holy place to another. I’d tramp and tramp. That
would be splendid!

ANYA. The birds are singing in the garden. What time is it now?

VARYA. It must be getting on for three. Time you went to sleep, darling.
[Goes into ANYA’S room] Splendid!

[Enter YASHA with a plaid shawl and a travelling bag.]

YASHA. [Crossing the stage: Politely] May I go this way?

DUNYASHA. I hardly knew you, Yasha. You have changed abroad.

YASHA. Hm... and who are you?

DUNYASHA. When you went away I was only so high. [Showing with her hand]
I’m Dunyasha, the daughter of Theodore Kozoyedov. You don’t remember!

YASHA. Oh, you little cucumber!

[Looks round and embraces her. She screams and drops a saucer. YASHA
goes out quickly.]

VARYA. [In the doorway: In an angry voice] What’s that?

DUNYASHA. [Through her tears] I’ve broken a saucer.

VARYA. It may bring luck.

ANYA. [Coming out of her room] We must tell mother that Peter’s here.

VARYA. I told them not to wake him.

ANYA. [Thoughtfully] Father died six years ago, and a month later my
brother Grisha was drowned in the river--such a dear little boy of
seven! Mother couldn’t bear it; she went away, away, without looking
round.... [Shudders] How I understand her; if only she knew! [Pause] And
Peter Trofimov was Grisha’s tutor, he might tell her....

[Enter FIERS in a short jacket and white waistcoat.]

FIERS. [Goes to the coffee-pot, nervously] The mistress is going to
have some food here.... [Puts on white gloves] Is the coffee ready? [To
DUNYASHA, severely] You! Where’s the cream?

DUNYASHA. Oh, dear me...! [Rapid exit.]

FIERS. [Fussing round the coffee-pot] Oh, you bungler.... [Murmurs
to himself] Back from Paris... the master went to Paris once... in a
carriage.... [Laughs.]

VARYA. What are you talking about, Fiers?

FIERS. I beg your pardon? [Joyfully] The mistress is home again. I’ve
lived to see her! Don’t care if I die now.... [Weeps with joy.]

[Enter LUBOV ANDREYEVNA, GAEV, LOPAKHIN, and SIMEONOV-PISCHIN, the
latter in a long jacket of thin cloth and loose trousers. GAEV, coming
in, moves his arms and body about as if he is playing billiards.]

LUBOV. Let me remember now. Red into the corner! Twice into the centre!

GAEV. Right into the pocket! Once upon a time you and I used both to
sleep in this room, and now I’m fifty-one; it does seem strange.

LOPAKHIN. Yes, time does go.

GAEV. Who does?

LOPAKHIN. I said that time does go.

GAEV. It smells of patchouli here.

ANYA. I’m going to bed. Good-night, mother. [Kisses her.]

LUBOV. My lovely little one. [Kisses her hand] Glad to be at home? I
can’t get over it.

ANYA. Good-night, uncle.

GAEV. [Kisses her face and hands] God be with you. How you do resemble
your mother! [To his sister] You were just like her at her age, Luba.

[ANYA gives her hand to LOPAKHIN and PISCHIN and goes out, shutting the
door behind her.]

LUBOV. She’s awfully tired.

PISCHIN. It’s a very long journey.

VARYA. [To LOPAKHIN and PISCHIN] Well, sirs, it’s getting on for three,
quite time you went.

LUBOV. [Laughs] You’re just the same as ever, Varya. [Draws her close
and kisses her] I’ll have some coffee now, then we’ll all go. [FIERS
lays a cushion under her feet] Thank you, dear. I’m used to coffee. I
drink it day and night. Thank you, dear old man. [Kisses FIERS.]

VARYA. I’ll go and see if they’ve brought in all the luggage. [Exit.]

LUBOV. Is it really I who am sitting here? [Laughs] I want to jump
about and wave my arms. [Covers her face with her hands] But suppose I’m
dreaming! God knows I love my own country, I love it deeply; I couldn’t
look out of the railway carriage, I cried so much. [Through her tears]
Still, I must have my coffee. Thank you, Fiers. Thank you, dear old man.
I’m so glad you’re still with us.

FIERS. The day before yesterday.

GAEV. He doesn’t hear well.

LOPAKHIN. I’ve got to go off to Kharkov by the five o’clock train. I’m
awfully sorry! I should like to have a look at you, to gossip a little.
You’re as fine-looking as ever.

PISCHIN. [Breathes heavily] Even finer-looking... dressed in Paris
fashions... confound it all.

LOPAKHIN. Your brother, Leonid Andreyevitch, says I’m a snob, a usurer,
but that is absolutely nothing to me. Let him talk. Only I do wish you
would believe in me as you once did, that your wonderful, touching eyes
would look at me as they did before. Merciful God! My father was the
serf of your grandfather and your own father, but you--you more than
anybody else--did so much for me once upon a time that I’ve forgotten
everything and love you as if you belonged to my family... and even
more.

LUBOV. I can’t sit still, I’m not in a state to do it. [Jumps up and
walks about in great excitement] I’ll never survive this happiness....
You can laugh at me; I’m a silly woman.... My dear little cupboard.
[Kisses cupboard] My little table.

GAEV. Nurse has died in your absence.

LUBOV. [Sits and drinks coffee] Yes, bless her soul. I heard by letter.

GAEV. And Anastasius has died too. Peter Kosoy has left me and now lives
in town with the Commissioner of Police. [Takes a box of sugar-candy out
of his pocket and sucks a piece.]

PISCHIN. My daughter, Dashenka, sends her love.

LOPAKHIN. I want to say something very pleasant, very delightful, to
you. [Looks at his watch] I’m going away at once, I haven’t much time...
but I’ll tell you all about it in two or three words. As you already
know, your cherry orchard is to be sold to pay your debts, and the sale
is fixed for August 22; but you needn’t be alarmed, dear madam, you
may sleep in peace; there’s a way out. Here’s my plan. Please attend
carefully! Your estate is only thirteen miles from the town, the railway
runs by, and if the cherry orchard and the land by the river are broken
up into building lots and are then leased off for villas you’ll get at
least twenty-five thousand roubles a year profit out of it.

GAEV. How utterly absurd!

LUBOV. I don’t understand you at all, Ermolai Alexeyevitch.

LOPAKHIN. You will get twenty-five roubles a year for each dessiatin
from the leaseholders at the very least, and if you advertise now I’m
willing to bet that you won’t have a vacant plot left by the autumn;
they’ll all go. In a word, you’re saved. I congratulate you. Only,
of course, you’ll have to put things straight, and clean up.... For
instance, you’ll have to pull down all the old buildings, this house,
which isn’t any use to anybody now, and cut down the old cherry
orchard....

LUBOV. Cut it down? My dear man, you must excuse me, but you don’t
understand anything at all. If there’s anything interesting or
remarkable in the whole province, it’s this cherry orchard of ours.

LOPAKHIN. The only remarkable thing about the orchard is that it’s very
large. It only bears fruit every other year, and even then you don’t
know what to do with them; nobody buys any.

GAEV. This orchard is mentioned in the “Encyclopaedic Dictionary.”

LOPAKHIN. [Looks at his watch] If we can’t think of anything and don’t
make up our minds to anything, then on August 22, both the cherry
orchard and the whole estate will be up for auction. Make up your mind!
I swear there’s no other way out, I’ll swear it again.

FIERS. In the old days, forty or fifty years back, they dried the
cherries, soaked them and pickled them, and made jam of them, and it
used to happen that...

GAEV. Be quiet, Fiers.

FIERS. And then we’d send the dried cherries off in carts to Moscow and
Kharkov. And money! And the dried cherries were soft, juicy, sweet, and
nicely scented.... They knew the way....

LUBOV. What was the way?

FIERS. They’ve forgotten. Nobody remembers.

PISCHIN. [To LUBOV ANDREYEVNA] What about Paris? Eh? Did you eat frogs?

LUBOV. I ate crocodiles.

PISCHIN. To think of that, now.

LOPAKHIN. Up to now in the villages there were only the gentry and the
labourers, and now the people who live in villas have arrived. All towns
now, even small ones, are surrounded by villas. And it’s safe to say
that in twenty years’ time the villa resident will be all over the
place. At present he sits on his balcony and drinks tea, but it may well
come to pass that he’ll begin to cultivate his patch of land, and then
your cherry orchard will be happy, rich, splendid....

GAEV. [Angry] What rot!

[Enter VARYA and YASHA.]

VARYA. There are two telegrams for you, little mother. [Picks out a key
and noisily unlocks an antique cupboard] Here they are.

LUBOV. They’re from Paris.... [Tears them up without reading them] I’ve
done with Paris.

GAEV. And do you know, Luba, how old this case is? A week ago I took out
the bottom drawer; I looked and saw figures burnt out in it. That case
was made exactly a hundred years ago. What do you think of that? What?
We could celebrate its jubilee. It hasn’t a soul of its own, but still,
say what you will, it’s a fine bookcase.

PISCHIN. [Astonished] A hundred years.... Think of that!

GAEV. Yes... it’s a real thing. [Handling it] My dear and honoured case!
I congratulate you on your existence, which has already for more than
a hundred years been directed towards the bright ideals of good and
justice; your silent call to productive labour has not grown less in the
hundred years [Weeping] during which you have upheld virtue and faith
in a better future to the generations of our race, educating us up
to ideals of goodness and to the knowledge of a common consciousness.
[Pause.]

LOPAKHIN. Yes....

LUBOV. You’re just the same as ever, Leon.

GAEV. [A little confused] Off the white on the right, into the corner
pocket. Red ball goes into the middle pocket!

LOPAKHIN. [Looks at his watch] It’s time I went.

YASHA. [Giving LUBOV ANDREYEVNA her medicine] Will you take your pills
now?

PISCHIN. You oughtn’t to take medicines, dear madam; they do you neither
harm nor good.... Give them here, dear madam. [Takes the pills, turns
them out into the palm of his hand, blows on them, puts them into his
mouth, and drinks some kvass] There!

LUBOV. [Frightened] You’re off your head!

PISCHIN. I’ve taken all the pills.

LOPAKHIN. Gormandizer! [All laugh.]

FIERS. They were here in Easter week and ate half a pailful of
cucumbers.... [Mumbles.]

LUBOV. What’s he driving at?

VARYA. He’s been mumbling away for three years. We’re used to that.

YASHA. Senile decay.

[CHARLOTTA IVANOVNA crosses the stage, dressed in white: she is very
thin and tightly laced; has a lorgnette at her waist.]

LOPAKHIN. Excuse me, Charlotta Ivanovna, I haven’t said “How do you do”
 to you yet. [Tries to kiss her hand.]

CHARLOTTA. [Takes her hand away] If you let people kiss your hand, then
they’ll want your elbow, then your shoulder, and then...

LOPAKHIN. My luck’s out to-day! [All laugh] Show us a trick, Charlotta
Ivanovna!

LUBOV ANDREYEVNA. Charlotta, do us a trick.

CHARLOTTA. It’s not necessary. I want to go to bed. [Exit.]

LOPAKHIN. We shall see each other in three weeks. [Kisses LUBOV
ANDREYEVNA’S hand] Now, good-bye. It’s time to go. [To GAEV] See you
again. [Kisses PISCHIN] Au revoir. [Gives his hand to VARYA, then to
FIERS and to YASHA] I don’t want to go away. [To LUBOV ANDREYEVNA]. If
you think about the villas and make up your mind, then just let me
know, and I’ll raise a loan of 50,000 roubles at once. Think about it
seriously.

VARYA. [Angrily] Do go, now!

LOPAKHIN. I’m going, I’m going.... [Exit.]

GAEV. Snob. Still, I beg pardon.... Varya’s going to marry him, he’s
Varya’s young man.

VARYA. Don’t talk too much, uncle.

LUBOV. Why not, Varya? I should be very glad. He’s a good man.

PISCHIN. To speak the honest truth... he’s a worthy man.... And my
Dashenka... also says that... she says lots of things. [Snores, but
wakes up again at once] But still, dear madam, if you could lend me...
240 roubles... to pay the interest on my mortgage to-morrow...

VARYA. [Frightened] We haven’t got it, we haven’t got it!

LUBOV. It’s quite true. I’ve nothing at all.

PISCHIN. I’ll find it all right [Laughs] I never lose hope. I used to
think, “Everything’s lost now. I’m a dead man,” when, lo and behold, a
railway was built over my land... and they paid me for it. And something
else will happen to-day or to-morrow. Dashenka may win 20,000 roubles...
she’s got a lottery ticket.

LUBOV. The coffee’s all gone, we can go to bed.

FIERS. [Brushing GAEV’S trousers; in an insistent tone] You’ve put on
the wrong trousers again. What am I to do with you?

VARYA. [Quietly] Anya’s asleep. [Opens window quietly] The sun has risen
already; it isn’t cold. Look, little mother: what lovely trees! And the
air! The starlings are singing!

GAEV. [Opens the other window] The whole garden’s white. You haven’t
forgotten, Luba? There’s that long avenue going straight, straight, like
a stretched strap; it shines on moonlight nights. Do you remember? You
haven’t forgotten?

LUBOV. [Looks out into the garden] Oh, my childhood, days of my
innocence! In this nursery I used to sleep; I used to look out from here
into the orchard. Happiness used to wake with me every morning, and then
it was just as it is now; nothing has changed. [Laughs from joy] It’s
all, all white! Oh, my orchard! After the dark autumns and the cold
winters, you’re young again, full of happiness, the angels of heaven
haven’t left you.... If only I could take my heavy burden off my breast
and shoulders, if I could forget my past!

GAEV. Yes, and they’ll sell this orchard to pay off debts. How strange
it seems!

LUBOV. Look, there’s my dead mother going in the orchard... dressed in
white! [Laughs from joy] That’s she.

GAEV. Where?

VARYA. God bless you, little mother.

LUBOV. There’s nobody there; I thought I saw somebody. On the right, at
the turning by the summer-house, a white little tree bent down, looking
just like a woman. [Enter TROFIMOV in a worn student uniform and
spectacles] What a marvellous garden! White masses of flowers, the blue
sky....

TROFIMOV. Lubov Andreyevna! [She looks round at him] I only want to show
myself, and I’ll go away. [Kisses her hand warmly] I was told to wait
till the morning, but I didn’t have the patience.

[LUBOV ANDREYEVNA looks surprised.]

VARYA. [Crying] It’s Peter Trofimov.

TROFIMOV. Peter Trofimov, once the tutor of your Grisha.... Have I
changed so much?

[LUBOV ANDREYEVNA embraces him and cries softly.]

GAEV. [Confused] That’s enough, that’s enough, Luba.

VARYA. [Weeps] But I told you, Peter, to wait till to-morrow.

LUBOV. My Grisha... my boy... Grisha... my son.

VARYA. What are we to do, little mother? It’s the will of God.

TROFIMOV. [Softly, through his tears] It’s all right, it’s all right.

LUBOV. [Still weeping] My boy’s dead; he was drowned. Why? Why, my
friend? [Softly] Anya’s asleep in there. I am speaking so loudly, making
such a noise.... Well, Peter? What’s made you look so bad? Why have you
grown so old?

TROFIMOV. In the train an old woman called me a decayed gentleman.

LUBOV. You were quite a boy then, a nice little student, and now your
hair is not at all thick and you wear spectacles. Are you really still a
student? [Goes to the door.]

TROFIMOV. I suppose I shall always be a student.

LUBOV. [Kisses her brother, then VARYA] Well, let’s go to bed.... And
you’ve grown older, Leonid.

PISCHIN. [Follows her] Yes, we’ve got to go to bed.... Oh, my gout! I’ll
stay the night here. If only, Lubov Andreyevna, my dear, you could get
me 240 roubles to-morrow morning--

GAEV. Still the same story.

PISCHIN. Two hundred and forty roubles... to pay the interest on the
mortgage.

LUBOV. I haven’t any money, dear man.

PISCHIN. I’ll give it back... it’s a small sum....

LUBOV. Well, then, Leonid will give it to you.... Let him have it,
Leonid.

GAEV. By all means; hold out your hand.

LUBOV. Why not? He wants it; he’ll give it back.

[LUBOV ANDREYEVNA, TROFIMOV, PISCHIN, and FIERS go out. GAEV, VARYA, and
YASHA remain.]

GAEV. My sister hasn’t lost the habit of throwing money about. [To
YASHA] Stand off, do; you smell of poultry.

YASHA. [Grins] You are just the same as ever, Leonid Andreyevitch.

GAEV. Really? [To VARYA] What’s he saying?

VARYA. [To YASHA] Your mother’s come from the village; she’s been
sitting in the servants’ room since yesterday, and wants to see you....

YASHA. Bless the woman!

VARYA. Shameless man.

YASHA. A lot of use there is in her coming. She might have come tomorrow
just as well. [Exit.]

VARYA. Mother hasn’t altered a scrap, she’s just as she always was.
She’d give away everything, if the idea only entered her head.

GAEV. Yes.... [Pause] If there’s any illness for which people offer many
remedies, you may be sure that particular illness is incurable, I think.
I work my brains to their hardest. I’ve several remedies, very many,
and that really means I’ve none at all. It would be nice to inherit a
fortune from somebody, it would be nice to marry our Anya to a rich
man, it would be nice to go to Yaroslav and try my luck with my aunt the
Countess. My aunt is very, very rich.

VARYA. [Weeps] If only God helped us.

GAEV. Don’t cry. My aunt’s very rich, but she doesn’t like us. My
sister, in the first place, married an advocate, not a noble.... [ANYA
appears in the doorway] She not only married a man who was not a noble,
but she behaved herself in a way which cannot be described as proper.
She’s nice and kind and charming, and I’m very fond of her, but say what
you will in her favour and you still have to admit that she’s wicked;
you can feel it in her slightest movements.

VARYA. [Whispers] Anya’s in the doorway.

GAEV. Really? [Pause] It’s curious, something’s got into my right eye...
I can’t see properly out of it. And on Thursday, when I was at the
District Court...

[Enter ANYA.]

VARYA. Why aren’t you in bed, Anya?

ANYA. Can’t sleep. It’s no good.

GAEV. My darling! [Kisses ANYA’S face and hands] My child.... [Crying]
You’re not my niece, you’re my angel, you’re my all.... Believe in me,
believe...

ANYA. I do believe in you, uncle. Everybody loves you and respects
you... but, uncle dear, you ought to say nothing, no more than that.
What were you saying just now about my mother, your own sister? Why did
you say those things?

GAEV. Yes, yes. [Covers his face with her hand] Yes, really, it was
awful. Save me, my God! And only just now I made a speech before a
bookcase... it’s so silly! And only when I’d finished I knew how silly
it was.

VARYA. Yes, uncle dear, you really ought to say less. Keep quiet, that’s
all.

ANYA. You’d be so much happier in yourself if you only kept quiet.

GAEV. All right, I’ll be quiet. [Kisses their hands] I’ll be quiet. But
let’s talk business. On Thursday I was in the District Court, and a lot
of us met there together, and we began to talk of this, that, and the
other, and now I think I can arrange a loan to pay the interest into the
bank.

VARYA. If only God would help us!

GAEV. I’ll go on Tuesday. I’ll talk with them about it again. [To VARYA]
Don’t howl. [To ANYA] Your mother will have a talk to Lopakhin; he, of
course, won’t refuse... And when you’ve rested you’ll go to Yaroslav to
the Countess, your grandmother. So you see, we’ll have three irons in
the fire, and we’ll be safe. We’ll pay up the interest. I’m certain.
[Puts some sugar-candy into his mouth] I swear on my honour, on anything
you will, that the estate will not be sold! [Excitedly] I swear on my
happiness! Here’s my hand. You may call me a dishonourable wretch if I
let it go to auction! I swear by all I am!

ANYA. [She is calm again and happy] How good and clever you are, uncle.
[Embraces him] I’m happy now! I’m happy! All’s well!

[Enter FIERS.]

FIERS. [Reproachfully] Leonid Andreyevitch, don’t you fear God? When are
you going to bed?

GAEV. Soon, soon. You go away, Fiers. I’ll undress myself. Well,
children, bye-bye...! I’ll give you the details to-morrow, but let’s go
to bed now. [Kisses ANYA and VARYA] I’m a man of the eighties.... People
don’t praise those years much, but I can still say that I’ve suffered
for my beliefs. The peasants don’t love me for nothing, I assure you.
We’ve got to learn to know the peasants! We ought to learn how....

ANYA. You’re doing it again, uncle!

VARYA. Be quiet, uncle!

FIERS. [Angrily] Leonid Andreyevitch!

GAEV. I’m coming, I’m coming.... Go to bed now. Off two cushions into
the middle! I turn over a new leaf.... [Exit. FIERS goes out after him.]

ANYA. I’m quieter now. I don’t want to go to Yaroslav, I don’t like
grandmother; but I’m calm now; thanks to uncle. [Sits down.]

VARYA. It’s time to go to sleep. I’ll go. There’s been an unpleasantness
here while you were away. In the old servants’ part of the house, as you
know, only the old people live--little old Efim and Polya and Evstigney,
and Karp as well. They started letting some tramps or other spend the
night there--I said nothing. Then I heard that they were saying that I
had ordered them to be fed on peas and nothing else; from meanness, you
see.... And it was all Evstigney’s doing.... Very well, I thought,
if that’s what the matter is, just you wait. So I call Evstigney....
[Yawns] He comes. “What’s this,” I say, “Evstigney, you old fool.”...
[Looks at ANYA] Anya dear! [Pause] She’s dropped off.... [Takes ANYA’S
arm] Let’s go to bye-bye.... Come along!... [Leads her] My darling’s
gone to sleep! Come on.... [They go. In the distance, the other side of
the orchard, a shepherd plays his pipe. TROFIMOV crosses the stage and
stops on seeing VARYA and ANYA] Sh! She’s asleep, asleep. Come on, dear.

ANYA. [Quietly, half-asleep] I’m so tired... all the bells... uncle,
dear! Mother and uncle!

VARYA. Come on, dear, come on! [They go into ANYA’S room.]

TROFIMOV. [Moved] My sun! My spring!

Curtain.




ACT TWO


[In a field. An old, crooked shrine, which has been long abandoned; near
it a well and large stones, which apparently are old tombstones, and
an old garden seat. The road is seen to GAEV’S estate. On one side rise
dark poplars, behind them begins the cherry orchard. In the distance
is a row of telegraph poles, and far, far away on the horizon are the
indistinct signs of a large town, which can only be seen on the finest
and clearest days. It is close on sunset. CHARLOTTA, YASHA, and DUNYASHA
are sitting on the seat; EPIKHODOV stands by and plays on a guitar; all
seem thoughtful. CHARLOTTA wears a man’s old peaked cap; she has unslung
a rifle from her shoulders and is putting to rights the buckle on the
strap.]

CHARLOTTA. [Thoughtfully] I haven’t a real passport. I don’t know how
old I am, and I think I’m young. When I was a little girl my father and
mother used to go round fairs and give very good performances and I used
to do the _salto mortale_ and various little things. And when papa and
mamma died a German lady took me to her and began to teach me. I liked
it. I grew up and became a governess. And where I came from and who
I am, I don’t know.... Who my parents were--perhaps they weren’t
married--I don’t know. [Takes a cucumber out of her pocket and eats] I
don’t know anything. [Pause] I do want to talk, but I haven’t anybody to
talk to... I haven’t anybody at all.

EPIKHODOV. [Plays on the guitar and sings]

   “What is this noisy earth to me,
   What matter friends and foes?”
    I do like playing on the mandoline!

DUNYASHA. That’s a guitar, not a mandoline. [Looks at herself in a
little mirror and powders herself.]

EPIKHODOV. For the enamoured madman, this is a mandoline. [Sings]

   “Oh that the heart was warmed,
   By all the flames of love returned!”

[YASHA sings too.]

CHARLOTTA. These people sing terribly.... Foo! Like jackals.

DUNYASHA. [To YASHA] Still, it must be nice to live abroad.

YASHA. Yes, certainly. I cannot differ from you there. [Yawns and lights
a cigar.]

EPIKHODOV. That is perfectly natural. Abroad everything is in full
complexity.

YASHA. That goes without saying.

EPIKHODOV. I’m an educated man, I read various remarkable books, but I
cannot understand the direction I myself want to go--whether to live
or to shoot myself, as it were. So, in case, I always carry a revolver
about with me. Here it is. [Shows a revolver.]

CHARLOTTA. I’ve done. Now I’ll go. [Slings the rifle] You, Epikhodov,
are a very clever man and very terrible; women must be madly in love
with you. Brrr! [Going] These wise ones are all so stupid. I’ve nobody
to talk to. I’m always alone, alone; I’ve nobody at all... and I don’t
know who I am or why I live. [Exit slowly.]

EPIKHODOV. As a matter of fact, independently of everything else, I must
express my feeling, among other things, that fate has been as pitiless
in her dealings with me as a storm is to a small ship. Suppose, let
us grant, I am wrong; then why did I wake up this morning, to give an
example, and behold an enormous spider on my chest, like that. [Shows
with both hands] And if I do drink some kvass, why is it that there is
bound to be something of the most indelicate nature in it, such as a
beetle? [Pause] Have you read Buckle? [Pause] I should like to trouble
you, Avdotya Fedorovna, for two words.

DUNYASHA. Say on.

EPIKHODOV. I should prefer to be alone with you. [Sighs.]

DUNYASHA. [Shy] Very well, only first bring me my little cloak.... It’s
by the cupboard. It’s a little damp here.

EPIKHODOV. Very well... I’ll bring it.... Now I know what to do with my
revolver. [Takes guitar and exits, strumming.]

YASHA. Two-and-twenty troubles! A silly man, between you and me and the
gatepost. [Yawns.]

DUNYASHA. I hope to goodness he won’t shoot himself. [Pause] I’m so
nervous, I’m worried. I went into service when I was quite a little
girl, and now I’m not used to common life, and my hands are white, white
as a lady’s. I’m so tender and so delicate now; respectable and afraid
of everything.... I’m so frightened. And I don’t know what will happen
to my nerves if you deceive me, Yasha.

YASHA. [Kisses her] Little cucumber! Of course, every girl must respect
herself; there’s nothing I dislike more than a badly behaved girl.

DUNYASHA. I’m awfully in love with you; you’re educated, you can talk
about everything. [Pause.]

YASHA. [Yawns] Yes. I think this: if a girl loves anybody, then that
means she’s immoral. [Pause] It’s nice to smoke a cigar out in the open
air.... [Listens] Somebody’s coming. It’s the mistress, and people with
her. [DUNYASHA embraces him suddenly] Go to the house, as if you’d been
bathing in the river; go by this path, or they’ll meet you and will
think I’ve been meeting you. I can’t stand that sort of thing.

DUNYASHA. [Coughs quietly] My head’s aching because of your cigar.

[Exit. YASHA remains, sitting by the shrine. Enter LUBOV ANDREYEVNA,
GAEV, and LOPAKHIN.]

LOPAKHIN. You must make up your mind definitely--there’s no time to
waste. The question is perfectly plain. Are you willing to let the land
for villas or no? Just one word, yes or no? Just one word!

LUBOV. Who’s smoking horrible cigars here? [Sits.]

GAEV. They built that railway; that’s made this place very handy. [Sits]
Went to town and had lunch... red in the middle! I’d like to go in now
and have just one game.

LUBOV. You’ll have time.

LOPAKHIN. Just one word! [Imploringly] Give me an answer!

GAEV. [Yawns] Really!

LUBOV. [Looks in her purse] I had a lot of money yesterday, but there’s
very little to-day. My poor Varya feeds everybody on milk soup to
save money, in the kitchen the old people only get peas, and I spend
recklessly. [Drops the purse, scattering gold coins] There, they are all
over the place.

YASHA. Permit me to pick them up. [Collects the coins.]

LUBOV. Please do, Yasha. And why did I go and have lunch there?... A
horrid restaurant with band and tablecloths smelling of soap.... Why
do you drink so much, Leon? Why do you eat so much? Why do you talk so
much? You talked again too much to-day in the restaurant, and it wasn’t
at all to the point--about the seventies and about decadents. And to
whom? Talking to the waiters about decadents!

LOPAKHIN. Yes.

GAEV. [Waves his hand] I can’t be cured, that’s obvious.... [Irritably
to YASHA] What’s the matter? Why do you keep twisting about in front of
me?

YASHA. [Laughs] I can’t listen to your voice without laughing.

GAEV. [To his sister] Either he or I...

LUBOV. Go away, Yasha; get out of this....

YASHA. [Gives purse to LUBOV ANDREYEVNA] I’ll go at once. [Hardly able
to keep from laughing] This minute.... [Exit.]

LOPAKHIN. That rich man Deriganov is preparing to buy your estate. They
say he’ll come to the sale himself.

LUBOV. Where did you hear that?

LOPAKHIN. They say so in town.

GAEV. Our Yaroslav aunt has promised to send something, but I don’t know
when or how much.

LOPAKHIN. How much will she send? A hundred thousand roubles? Or two,
perhaps?

LUBOV. I’d be glad of ten or fifteen thousand.

LOPAKHIN. You must excuse my saying so, but I’ve never met such
frivolous people as you before, or anybody so unbusinesslike and
peculiar. Here I am telling you in plain language that your estate will
be sold, and you don’t seem to understand.

LUBOV. What are we to do? Tell us, what?

LOPAKHIN. I tell you every day. I say the same thing every day. Both the
cherry orchard and the land must be leased off for villas and at once,
immediately--the auction is staring you in the face: Understand! Once
you do definitely make up your minds to the villas, then you’ll have as
much money as you want and you’ll be saved.

LUBOV. Villas and villa residents--it’s so vulgar, excuse me.

GAEV. I entirely agree with you.

LOPAKHIN. I must cry or yell or faint. I can’t stand it! You’re too much
for me! [To GAEV] You old woman!

GAEV. Really!

LOPAKHIN. Old woman! [Going out.]

LUBOV. [Frightened] No, don’t go away, do stop; be a dear. Please.
Perhaps we’ll find some way out!

LOPAKHIN. What’s the good of trying to think!

LUBOV. Please don’t go away. It’s nicer when you’re here.... [Pause]
I keep on waiting for something to happen, as if the house is going to
collapse over our heads.

GAEV. [Thinking deeply] Double in the corner... across the middle....

LUBOV. We have been too sinful....

LOPAKHIN. What sins have you committed?

GAEV. [Puts candy into his mouth] They say that I’ve eaten all my
substance in sugar-candies. [Laughs.]

LUBOV. Oh, my sins.... I’ve always scattered money about without holding
myself in, like a madwoman, and I married a man who made nothing but
debts. My husband died of champagne--he drank terribly--and to my
misfortune, I fell in love with another man and went off with him, and
just at that time--it was my first punishment, a blow that hit me right
on the head--here, in the river... my boy was drowned, and I went away,
quite away, never to return, never to see this river again...I shut my
eyes and ran without thinking, but _he_ ran after me... without pity,
without respect. I bought a villa near Mentone because _he_ fell ill
there, and for three years I knew no rest either by day or night; the
sick man wore me out, and my soul dried up. And last year, when they
had sold the villa to pay my debts, I went away to Paris, and there
he robbed me of all I had and threw me over and went off with another
woman. I tried to poison myself.... It was so silly, so shameful....
And suddenly I longed to be back in Russia, my own land, with my little
girl.... [Wipes her tears] Lord, Lord be merciful to me, forgive me my
sins! Punish me no more! [Takes a telegram out of her pocket] I had
this to-day from Paris.... He begs my forgiveness, he implores me to
return.... [Tears it up] Don’t I hear music? [Listens.]

GAEV. That is our celebrated Jewish band. You remember--four violins, a
flute, and a double-bass.

LUBOV So it still exists? It would be nice if they came along some
evening.

LOPAKHIN. [Listens] I can’t hear.... [Sings quietly] “For money will the
Germans make a Frenchman of a Russian.” [Laughs] I saw such an awfully
funny thing at the theatre last night.

LUBOV. I’m quite sure there wasn’t anything at all funny. You oughtn’t
to go and see plays, you ought to go and look at yourself. What a grey
life you lead, what a lot you talk unnecessarily.

LOPAKHIN. It’s true. To speak the straight truth, we live a silly life.
[Pause] My father was a peasant, an idiot, he understood nothing, he
didn’t teach me, he was always drunk, and always used a stick on me. In
point of fact, I’m a fool and an idiot too. I’ve never learned anything,
my handwriting is bad, I write so that I’m quite ashamed before people,
like a pig!

LUBOV. You ought to get married, my friend.

LOPAKHIN. Yes... that’s true.

LUBOV. Why not to our Varya? She’s a nice girl.

LOPAKHIN. Yes.

LUBOV. She’s quite homely in her ways, works all day, and, what matters
most, she’s in love with you. And you’ve liked her for a long time.

LOPAKHIN. Well? I don’t mind... she’s a nice girl. [Pause.]

GAEV. I’m offered a place in a bank. Six thousand roubles a year.... Did
you hear?

LUBOV. What’s the matter with you! Stay where you are....

[Enter FIERS with an overcoat.]

FIERS. [To GAEV] Please, sir, put this on, it’s damp.

GAEV. [Putting it on] You’re a nuisance, old man.

FIERS It’s all very well.... You went away this morning without telling
me. [Examining GAEV.]

LUBOV. How old you’ve grown, Fiers!

FIERS. I beg your pardon?

LOPAKHIN. She says you’ve grown very old!

FIERS. I’ve been alive a long time. They were already getting ready
to marry me before your father was born.... [Laughs] And when the
Emancipation came I was already first valet. Only I didn’t agree with
the Emancipation and remained with my people.... [Pause] I remember
everybody was happy, but they didn’t know why.

LOPAKHIN. It was very good for them in the old days. At any rate, they
used to beat them.

FIERS. [Not hearing] Rather. The peasants kept their distance from the
masters and the masters kept their distance from the peasants, but now
everything’s all anyhow and you can’t understand anything.

GAEV. Be quiet, Fiers. I’ve got to go to town tomorrow. I’ve been
promised an introduction to a General who may lend me money on a bill.

LOPAKHIN. Nothing will come of it. And you won’t pay your interest,
don’t you worry.

LUBOV. He’s talking rubbish. There’s no General at all.

[Enter TROFIMOV, ANYA, and VARYA.]

GAEV. Here they are.

ANYA. Mother’s sitting down here.

LUBOV. [Tenderly] Come, come, my dears.... [Embracing ANYA and VARYA] If
you two only knew how much I love you. Sit down next to me, like that.
[All sit down.]

LOPAKHIN. Our eternal student is always with the ladies.

TROFIMOV. That’s not your business.

LOPAKHIN. He’ll soon be fifty, and he’s still a student.

TROFIMOV. Leave off your silly jokes!

LOPAKHIN. Getting angry, eh, silly?

TROFIMOV. Shut up, can’t you.

LOPAKHIN. [Laughs] I wonder what you think of me?

TROFIMOV. I think, Ermolai Alexeyevitch, that you’re a rich man,
and you’ll soon be a millionaire. Just as the wild beast which eats
everything it finds is needed for changes to take place in matter, so
you are needed too.

[All laugh.]

VARYA. Better tell us something about the planets, Peter.

LUBOV ANDREYEVNA. No, let’s go on with yesterday’s talk!

TROFIMOV. About what?

GAEV. About the proud man.

TROFIMOV. Yesterday we talked for a long time but we didn’t come to
anything in the end. There’s something mystical about the proud man, in
your sense. Perhaps you are right from your point of view, but if you
take the matter simply, without complicating it, then what pride can
there be, what sense can there be in it, if a man is imperfectly made,
physiologically speaking, if in the vast majority of cases he is coarse
and stupid and deeply unhappy? We must stop admiring one another. We
must work, nothing more.

GAEV. You’ll die, all the same.

TROFIMOV. Who knows? And what does it mean--you’ll die? Perhaps a man
has a hundred senses, and when he dies only the five known to us are
destroyed and the remaining ninety-five are left alive.

LUBOV. How clever of you, Peter!

LOPAKHIN. [Ironically] Oh, awfully!

TROFIMOV. The human race progresses, perfecting its powers.
Everything that is unattainable now will some day be near at hand and
comprehensible, but we must work, we must help with all our strength
those who seek to know what fate will bring. Meanwhile in Russia only
a very few of us work. The vast majority of those intellectuals whom I
know seek for nothing, do nothing, and are at present incapable of hard
work. They call themselves intellectuals, but they use “thou” and “thee”
 to their servants, they treat the peasants like animals, they learn
badly, they read nothing seriously, they do absolutely nothing, about
science they only talk, about art they understand little. They are
all serious, they all have severe faces, they all talk about important
things. They philosophize, and at the same time, the vast majority
of us, ninety-nine out of a hundred, live like savages, fighting and
cursing at the slightest opportunity, eating filthily, sleeping in the
dirt, in stuffiness, with fleas, stinks, smells, moral filth, and so
on... And it’s obvious that all our nice talk is only carried on to
distract ourselves and others. Tell me, where are those créches we hear
so much of? and where are those reading-rooms? People only write novels
about them; they don’t really exist. Only dirt, vulgarity, and Asiatic
plagues really exist.... I’m afraid, and I don’t at all like serious
faces; I don’t like serious conversations. Let’s be quiet sooner.

LOPAKHIN. You know, I get up at five every morning, I work from
morning till evening, I am always dealing with money--my own and other
people’s--and I see what people are like. You’ve only got to begin to
do anything to find out how few honest, honourable people there are.
Sometimes, when I can’t sleep, I think: “Oh Lord, you’ve given us huge
forests, infinite fields, and endless horizons, and we, living here,
ought really to be giants.”

LUBOV. You want giants, do you?... They’re only good in stories, and
even there they frighten one. [EPIKHODOV enters at the back of the stage
playing his guitar. Thoughtfully:] Epikhodov’s there.

ANYA. [Thoughtfully] Epikhodov’s there.

GAEV. The sun’s set, ladies and gentlemen.

TROFIMOV. Yes.

GAEV [Not loudly, as if declaiming] O Nature, thou art wonderful, thou
shinest with eternal radiance! Oh, beautiful and indifferent one, thou
whom we call mother, thou containest in thyself existence and death,
thou livest and destroyest....

VARYA. [Entreatingly] Uncle, dear!

ANYA. Uncle, you’re doing it again!

TROFIMOV. You’d better double the red into the middle.

GAEV. I’ll be quiet, I’ll be quiet.

[They all sit thoughtfully. It is quiet. Only the mumbling of FIERS is
heard. Suddenly a distant sound is heard as if from the sky, the sound
of a breaking string, which dies away sadly.]

LUBOV. What’s that?

LOPAKHIN. I don’t know. It may be a bucket fallen down a well somewhere.
But it’s some way off.

GAEV. Or perhaps it’s some bird... like a heron.

TROFIMOV. Or an owl.

LUBOV. [Shudders] It’s unpleasant, somehow. [A pause.]

FIERS. Before the misfortune the same thing happened. An owl screamed
and the samovar hummed without stopping.

GAEV. Before what misfortune?

FIERS. Before the Emancipation. [A pause.]

LUBOV. You know, my friends, let’s go in; it’s evening now. [To ANYA]
You’ve tears in your eyes.... What is it, little girl? [Embraces her.]

ANYA. It’s nothing, mother.

TROFIMOV. Some one’s coming.

[Enter a TRAMP in an old white peaked cap and overcoat. He is a little
drunk.]

TRAMP. Excuse me, may I go this way straight through to the station?

GAEV. You may. Go along this path.

TRAMP. I thank you from the bottom of my heart. [Hiccups] Lovely
weather.... [Declaims] My brother, my suffering brother.... Come out on
the Volga, you whose groans... [To VARYA] Mademoiselle, please give a
hungry Russian thirty copecks....

[VARYA screams, frightened.]

LOPAKHIN. [Angrily] There’s manners everybody’s got to keep!

LUBOV. [With a start] Take this... here you are.... [Feels in her purse]
There’s no silver.... It doesn’t matter, here’s gold.

TRAMP. I am deeply grateful to you! [Exit. Laughter.]

VARYA. [Frightened] I’m going, I’m going.... Oh, little mother, at home
there’s nothing for the servants to eat, and you gave him gold.

LUBOV. What is to be done with such a fool as I am! At home I’ll give
you everything I’ve got. Ermolai Alexeyevitch, lend me some more!...

LOPAKHIN. Very well.

LUBOV. Let’s go, it’s time. And Varya, we’ve settled your affair; I
congratulate you.

VARYA. [Crying] You shouldn’t joke about this, mother.

LOPAKHIN. Oh, feel me, get thee to a nunnery.

GAEV. My hands are all trembling; I haven’t played billiards for a long
time.

LOPAKHIN. Oh, feel me, nymph, remember me in thine orisons.

LUBOV. Come along; it’ll soon be supper-time.

VARYA. He did frighten me. My heart is beating hard.

LOPAKHIN. Let me remind you, ladies and gentlemen, on August 22 the
cherry orchard will be sold. Think of that!... Think of that!...

[All go out except TROFIMOV and ANYA.]

ANYA. [Laughs] Thanks to the tramp who frightened Barbara, we’re alone
now.

TROFIMOV. Varya’s afraid we may fall in love with each other and won’t
get away from us for days on end. Her narrow mind won’t allow her to
understand that we are above love. To escape all the petty and deceptive
things which prevent our being happy and free, that is the aim and
meaning of our lives. Forward! We go irresistibly on to that bright star
which burns there, in the distance! Don’t lag behind, friends!

ANYA. [Clapping her hands] How beautifully you talk! [Pause] It is
glorious here to-day!

TROFIMOV. Yes, the weather is wonderful.

ANYA. What have you done to me, Peter? I don’t love the cherry orchard
as I used to. I loved it so tenderly, I thought there was no better
place in the world than our orchard.

TROFIMOV. All Russia is our orchard. The land is great and beautiful,
there are many marvellous places in it. [Pause] Think, Anya, your
grandfather, your great-grandfather, and all your ancestors were
serf-owners, they owned living souls; and now, doesn’t something human
look at you from every cherry in the orchard, every leaf and every
stalk? Don’t you hear voices...? Oh, it’s awful, your orchard is
terrible; and when in the evening or at night you walk through the
orchard, then the old bark on the trees sheds a dim light and the old
cherry-trees seem to be dreaming of all that was a hundred, two hundred
years ago, and are oppressed by their heavy visions. Still, at any
rate, we’ve left those two hundred years behind us. So far we’ve gained
nothing at all--we don’t yet know what the past is to be to us--we only
philosophize, we complain that we are dull, or we drink vodka. For it’s
so clear that in order to begin to live in the present we must first
redeem the past, and that can only be done by suffering, by strenuous,
uninterrupted labour. Understand that, Anya.

ANYA. The house in which we live has long ceased to be our house; I
shall go away. I give you my word.

TROFIMOV. If you have the housekeeping keys, throw them down the well
and go away. Be as free as the wind.

ANYA. [Enthusiastically] How nicely you said that!

TROFIMOV. Believe me, Anya, believe me! I’m not thirty yet, I’m young,
I’m still a student, but I have undergone a great deal! I’m as hungry
as the winter, I’m ill, I’m shaken. I’m as poor as a beggar, and where
haven’t I been--fate has tossed me everywhere! But my soul is always my
own; every minute of the day and the night it is filled with unspeakable
presentiments. I know that happiness is coming, Anya, I see it
already....

ANYA. [Thoughtful] The moon is rising.

[EPIKHODOV is heard playing the same sad song on his guitar. The moon
rises. Somewhere by the poplars VARYA is looking for ANYA and calling,
“Anya, where are you?”]

TROFIMOV. Yes, the moon has risen. [Pause] There is happiness, there it
comes; it comes nearer and nearer; I hear its steps already. And if we
do not see it we shall not know it, but what does that matter? Others
will see it!

THE VOICE OF VARYA. Anya! Where are you?

TROFIMOV. That’s Varya again! [Angry] Disgraceful!

ANYA. Never mind. Let’s go to the river. It’s nice there.

TROFIMOV Let’s go. [They go out.]

THE VOICE OF VARYA. Anya! Anya!

Curtain.




ACT THREE


[A reception-room cut off from a drawing-room by an arch. Chandelier
lighted. A Jewish band, the one mentioned in Act II, is heard playing
in another room. Evening. In the drawing-room the grand rond is being
danced. Voice of SIMEONOV PISCHIN “Promenade a une paire!” Dancers
come into the reception-room; the first pair are PISCHIN and CHARLOTTA
IVANOVNA; the second, TROFIMOV and LUBOV ANDREYEVNA; the third, ANYA and
the POST OFFICE CLERK; the fourth, VARYA and the STATION-MASTER, and
so on. VARYA is crying gently and wipes away her tears as she dances.
DUNYASHA is in the last pair. They go off into the drawing-room,
PISCHIN shouting, “Grand rond, balancez:” and “Les cavaliers à genou
et remerciez vos dames!” FIERS, in a dress-coat, carries a tray with
seltzer-water across. Enter PISCHIN and TROFIMOV from the drawing-room.]

PISCHIN. I’m full-blooded and have already had two strokes; it’s hard
for me to dance, but, as they say, if you’re in Rome, you must do as
Rome does. I’ve got the strength of a horse. My dead father, who liked
a joke, peace to his bones, used to say, talking of our ancestors,
that the ancient stock of the Simeonov-Pischins was descended from that
identical horse that Caligula made a senator.... [Sits] But the trouble
is, I’ve no money! A hungry dog only believes in meat. [Snores and wakes
up again immediately] So I... only believe in money....

TROFIMOV. Yes. There is something equine about your figure.

PISCHIN. Well... a horse is a fine animal... you can sell a horse.

[Billiard playing can be heard in the next room. VARYA appears under the
arch.]

TROFIMOV. [Teasing] Madame Lopakhin! Madame Lopakhin!

VARYA. [Angry] Decayed gentleman!

TROFIMOV. Yes, I am a decayed gentleman, and I’m proud of it!

VARYA. [Bitterly] We’ve hired the musicians, but how are they to be
paid? [Exit.]

TROFIMOV. [To PISCHIN] If the energy which you, in the course of your
life, have spent in looking for money to pay interest had been used
for something else, then, I believe, after all, you’d be able to turn
everything upside down.

PISCHIN. Nietzsche... a philosopher... a very great, a most celebrated
man... a man of enormous brain, says in his books that you can forge
bank-notes.

TROFIMOV. And have you read Nietzsche?

PISCHIN. Well... Dashenka told me. Now I’m in such a position, I
wouldn’t mind forging them... I’ve got to pay 310 roubles the day after
to-morrow... I’ve got 130 already.... [Feels his pockets, nervously]
I’ve lost the money! The money’s gone! [Crying] Where’s the money?
[Joyfully] Here it is behind the lining... I even began to perspire.

[Enter LUBOV ANDREYEVNA and CHARLOTTA IVANOVNA.]

LUBOV. [Humming a Caucasian dance] Why is Leonid away so long? What’s he
doing in town? [To DUNYASHA] Dunyasha, give the musicians some tea.

TROFIMOV. Business is off, I suppose.

LUBOV. And the musicians needn’t have come, and we needn’t have got up
this ball.... Well, never mind.... [Sits and sings softly.]

CHARLOTTA. [Gives a pack of cards to PISCHIN] Here’s a pack of cards,
think of any one card you like.

PISCHIN. I’ve thought of one.

CHARLOTTA. Now shuffle. All right, now. Give them here, oh my dear
Mr. Pischin. _Ein, zwei, drei_! Now look and you’ll find it in your
coat-tail pocket.

PISCHIN. [Takes a card out of his coat-tail pocket] Eight of spades,
quite right! [Surprised] Think of that now!

CHARLOTTA. [Holds the pack of cards on the palm of her hand. To
TROFIMOV] Now tell me quickly. What’s the top card?

TROFIMOV. Well, the queen of spades.

CHARLOTTA. Right! [To PISCHIN] Well now? What card’s on top?

PISCHIN. Ace of hearts.

CHARLOTTA. Right! [Claps her hands, the pack of cards vanishes] How
lovely the weather is to-day. [A mysterious woman’s voice answers her,
as if from under the floor, “Oh yes, it’s lovely weather, madam.”] You
are so beautiful, you are my ideal. [Voice, “You, madam, please me very
much too.”]

STATION-MASTER. [Applauds] Madame ventriloquist, bravo!

PISCHIN. [Surprised] Think of that, now! Delightful, Charlotte
Ivanovna... I’m simply in love....

CHARLOTTA. In love? [Shrugging her shoulders] Can you love? _Guter
Mensch aber schlechter Musikant_.

TROFIMOV. [Slaps PISCHIN on the shoulder] Oh, you horse!

CHARLOTTA. Attention please, here’s another trick. [Takes a shawl from a
chair] Here’s a very nice plaid shawl, I’m going to sell it.... [Shakes
it] Won’t anybody buy it?

PISCHIN. [Astonished] Think of that now!

CHARLOTTA. _Ein, zwei, drei_.

[She quickly lifts up the shawl, which is hanging down. ANYA is standing
behind it; she bows and runs to her mother, hugs her and runs back to
the drawing-room amid general applause.]

LUBOV. [Applauds] Bravo, bravo!

CHARLOTTA. Once again! _Ein, zwei, drei_!

[Lifts the shawl. VARYA stands behind it and bows.]

PISCHIN. [Astonished] Think of that, now.

CHARLOTTA. The end!

[Throws the shawl at PISCHIN, curtseys and runs into the drawing-room.]

PISCHIN. [Runs after her] Little wretch.... What? Would you? [Exit.]

LUBOV. Leonid hasn’t come yet. I don’t understand what he’s doing so
long in town! Everything must be over by now. The estate must be sold;
or, if the sale never came off, then why does he stay so long?

VARYA. [Tries to soothe her] Uncle has bought it. I’m certain of it.

TROFIMOV. [Sarcastically] Oh, yes!

VARYA. Grandmother sent him her authority for him to buy it in her name
and transfer the debt to her. She’s doing it for Anya. And I’m certain
that God will help us and uncle will buy it.

LUBOV. Grandmother sent fifteen thousand roubles from Yaroslav to buy
the property in her name--she won’t trust us--and that wasn’t even
enough to pay the interest. [Covers her face with her hands] My fate
will be settled to-day, my fate....

TROFIMOV. [Teasing VARYA] Madame Lopakhin!

VARYA. [Angry] Eternal student! He’s already been expelled twice from
the university.

LUBOV. Why are you getting angry, Varya? He’s teasing you about
Lopakhin, well what of it? You can marry Lopakhin if you want to, he’s a
good, interesting man.... You needn’t if you don’t want to; nobody wants
to force you against your will, my darling.

VARYA. I do look at the matter seriously, little mother, to be quite
frank. He’s a good man, and I like him.

LUBOV. Then marry him. I don’t understand what you’re waiting for.

VARYA. I can’t propose to him myself, little mother. People have been
talking about him to me for two years now, but he either says nothing,
or jokes about it. I understand. He’s getting rich, he’s busy, he can’t
bother about me. If I had some money, even a little, even only a hundred
roubles, I’d throw up everything and go away. I’d go into a convent.

TROFIMOV. How nice!

VARYA. [To TROFIMOV] A student ought to have sense! [Gently, in tears]
How ugly you are now, Peter, how old you’ve grown! [To LUBOV ANDREYEVNA,
no longer crying] But I can’t go on without working, little mother. I
want to be doing something every minute.

[Enter YASHA.]

YASHA. [Nearly laughing] Epikhodov’s broken a billiard cue! [Exit.]

VARYA. Why is Epikhodov here? Who said he could play billiards? I don’t
understand these people. [Exit.]

LUBOV. Don’t tease her, Peter, you see that she’s quite unhappy without
that.

TROFIMOV. She takes too much on herself, she keeps on interfering in
other people’s business. The whole summer she’s given no peace to me or
to Anya, she’s afraid we’ll have a romance all to ourselves. What has it
to do with her? As if I’d ever given her grounds to believe I’d stoop to
such vulgarity! We are above love.

LUBOV. Then I suppose I must be beneath love. [In agitation] Why isn’t
Leonid here? If I only knew whether the estate is sold or not! The
disaster seems to me so improbable that I don’t know what to think, I’m
all at sea... I may scream... or do something silly. Save me, Peter. Say
something, say something.

TROFIMOV. Isn’t it all the same whether the estate is sold to-day or
isn’t? It’s been all up with it for a long time; there’s no turning
back, the path’s grown over. Be calm, dear, you shouldn’t deceive
yourself, for once in your life at any rate you must look the truth
straight in the face.

LUBOV. What truth? You see where truth is, and where untruth is, but
I seem to have lost my sight and see nothing. You boldly settle all
important questions, but tell me, dear, isn’t it because you’re young,
because you haven’t had time to suffer till you settled a single one
of your questions? You boldly look forward, isn’t it because you cannot
foresee or expect anything terrible, because so far life has been hidden
from your young eyes? You are bolder, more honest, deeper than we are,
but think only, be just a little magnanimous, and have mercy on me. I
was born here, my father and mother lived here, my grandfather too,
I love this house. I couldn’t understand my life without that cherry
orchard, and if it really must be sold, sell me with it! [Embraces
TROFIMOV, kisses his forehead]. My son was drowned here.... [Weeps] Have
pity on me, good, kind man.

TROFIMOV. You know I sympathize with all my soul.

LUBOV. Yes, but it ought to be said differently, differently.... [Takes
another handkerchief, a telegram falls on the floor] I’m so sick at
heart to-day, you can’t imagine. Here it’s so noisy, my soul shakes at
every sound. I shake all over, and I can’t go away by myself, I’m afraid
of the silence. Don’t judge me harshly, Peter... I loved you, as if you
belonged to my family. I’d gladly let Anya marry you, I swear it, only
dear, you ought to work, finish your studies. You don’t do anything,
only fate throws you about from place to place, it’s so odd.... Isn’t it
true? Yes? And you ought to do something to your beard to make it grow
better [Laughs] You are funny!

TROFIMOV. [Picking up telegram] I don’t want to be a Beau Brummel.

LUBOV. This telegram’s from Paris. I get one every day. Yesterday and
to-day. That wild man is ill again, he’s bad again.... He begs for
forgiveness, and implores me to come, and I really ought to go to Paris
to be near him. You look severe, Peter, but what can I do, my dear, what
can I do; he’s ill, he’s alone, unhappy, and who’s to look after
him, who’s to keep him away from his errors, to give him his medicine
punctually? And why should I conceal it and say nothing about it; I love
him, that’s plain, I love him, I love him.... That love is a stone round
my neck; I’m going with it to the bottom, but I love that stone and
can’t live without it. [Squeezes TROFIMOV’S hand] Don’t think badly of
me, Peter, don’t say anything to me, don’t say...

TROFIMOV. [Weeping] For God’s sake forgive my speaking candidly, but
that man has robbed you!

LUBOV. No, no, no, you oughtn’t to say that! [Stops her ears.]

TROFIMOV. But he’s a wretch, you alone don’t know it! He’s a petty
thief, a nobody....

LUBOV. [Angry, but restrained] You’re twenty-six or twenty-seven, and
still a schoolboy of the second class!

TROFIMOV. Why not!

LUBOV. You ought to be a man, at your age you ought to be able to
understand those who love. And you ought to be in love yourself, you
must fall in love! [Angry] Yes, yes! You aren’t pure, you’re just a
freak, a queer fellow, a funny growth...

TROFIMOV. [In horror] What is she saying!

LUBOV. “I’m above love!” You’re not above love, you’re just what our
Fiers calls a bungler. Not to have a mistress at your age!

TROFIMOV. [In horror] This is awful! What is she saying? [Goes quickly
up into the drawing-room, clutching his head] It’s awful... I can’t
stand it, I’ll go away. [Exit, but returns at once] All is over between
us! [Exit.]

LUBOV. [Shouts after him] Peter, wait! Silly man, I was joking! Peter!
[Somebody is heard going out and falling downstairs noisily. ANYA and
VARYA scream; laughter is heard immediately] What’s that?

[ANYA comes running in, laughing.]

ANYA. Peter’s fallen downstairs! [Runs out again.]

LUBOV. This Peter’s a marvel.

[The STATION-MASTER stands in the middle of the drawing-room and recites
“The Magdalen” by Tolstoy. He is listened to, but he has only delivered
a few lines when a waltz is heard from the front room, and the
recitation is stopped. Everybody dances. TROFIMOV, ANYA, VARYA, and
LUBOV ANDREYEVNA come in from the front room.]

LUBOV. Well, Peter... you pure soul... I beg your pardon... let’s dance.

[She dances with PETER. ANYA and VARYA dance. FIERS enters and stands
his stick by a side door. YASHA has also come in and looks on at the
dance.]

YASHA. Well, grandfather?

FIERS. I’m not well. At our balls some time back, generals and barons
and admirals used to dance, and now we send for post-office clerks and
the Station-master, and even they come as a favour. I’m very weak. The
dead master, the grandfather, used to give everybody sealing-wax when
anything was wrong. I’ve taken sealing-wax every day for twenty years,
and more; perhaps that’s why I still live.

YASHA. I’m tired of you, grandfather. [Yawns] If you’d only hurry up and
kick the bucket.

FIERS. Oh you... bungler! [Mutters.]

[TROFIMOV and LUBOV ANDREYEVNA dance in the reception-room, then into
the sitting-room.]

LUBOV. _Merci_. I’ll sit down. [Sits] I’m tired.

[Enter ANYA.]

ANYA. [Excited] Somebody in the kitchen was saying just now that the
cherry orchard was sold to-day.

LUBOV. Sold to whom?

ANYA. He didn’t say to whom. He’s gone now. [Dances out into the
reception-room with TROFIMOV.]

YASHA. Some old man was chattering about it a long time ago. A stranger!

FIERS. And Leonid Andreyevitch isn’t here yet, he hasn’t come. He’s
wearing a light, _demi-saison_ overcoat. He’ll catch cold. Oh these
young fellows.

LUBOV. I’ll die of this. Go and find out, Yasha, to whom it’s sold.

YASHA. Oh, but he’s been gone a long time, the old man. [Laughs.]

LUBOV. [Slightly vexed] Why do you laugh? What are you glad about?

YASHA. Epikhodov’s too funny. He’s a silly man. Two-and-twenty troubles.

LUBOV. Fiers, if the estate is sold, where will you go?

FIERS. I’ll go wherever you order me to go.

LUBOV. Why do you look like that? Are you ill? I think you ought to go
to bed....

FIERS. Yes... [With a smile] I’ll go to bed, and who’ll hand things
round and give orders without me? I’ve the whole house on my shoulders.

YASHA. [To LUBOV ANDREYEVNA] Lubov Andreyevna! I want to ask a favour of
you, if you’ll be so kind! If you go to Paris again, then please take
me with you. It’s absolutely impossible for me to stop here. [Looking
round; in an undertone] What’s the good of talking about it, you see for
yourself that this is an uneducated country, with an immoral population,
and it’s so dull. The food in the kitchen is beastly, and here’s this
Fiers walking about mumbling various inappropriate things. Take me with
you, be so kind!

[Enter PISCHIN.]

PISCHIN. I come to ask for the pleasure of a little waltz, dear lady....
[LUBOV ANDREYEVNA goes to him] But all the same, you wonderful woman,
I must have 180 little roubles from you... I must.... [They dance] 180
little roubles.... [They go through into the drawing-room.]

YASHA. [Sings softly]   “Oh, will you understand
   My soul’s deep restlessness?”

[In the drawing-room a figure in a grey top-hat and in baggy check
trousers is waving its hands and jumping about; there are cries of
“Bravo, Charlotta Ivanovna!”]

DUNYASHA. [Stops to powder her face] The young mistress tells me to
dance--there are a lot of gentlemen, but few ladies--and my head
goes round when I dance, and my heart beats, Fiers Nicolaevitch; the
Post-office clerk told me something just now which made me catch my
breath. [The music grows faint.]

FIERS. What did he say to you?

DUNYASHA. He says, “You’re like a little flower.”

YASHA. [Yawns] Impolite.... [Exit.]

DUNYASHA. Like a little flower. I’m such a delicate girl; I simply love
words of tenderness.

FIERS. You’ll lose your head.

[Enter EPIKHODOV.]

EPIKHODOV. You, Avdotya Fedorovna, want to see me no more than if I was
some insect. [Sighs] Oh, life!

DUNYASHA. What do you want?

EPIKHODOV. Undoubtedly, perhaps, you may be right. [Sighs] But,
certainly, if you regard the matter from the aspect, then you, if I may
say so, and you must excuse my candidness, have absolutely reduced me to
a state of mind. I know my fate, every day something unfortunate happens
to me, and I’ve grown used to it a long time ago, I even look at my fate
with a smile. You gave me your word, and though I...

DUNYASHA. Please, we’ll talk later on, but leave me alone now. I’m
meditating now. [Plays with her fan.]

EPIKHODOV. Every day something unfortunate happens to me, and I, if I
may so express myself, only smile, and even laugh.

[VARYA enters from the drawing-room.]

VARYA. Haven’t you gone yet, Simeon? You really have no respect for
anybody. [To DUNYASHA] You go away, Dunyasha. [To EPIKHODOV] You play
billiards and break a cue, and walk about the drawing-room as if you
were a visitor!

EPIKHODOV. You cannot, if I may say so, call me to order.

VARYA. I’m not calling you to order, I’m only telling you. You just walk
about from place to place and never do your work. Goodness only knows
why we keep a clerk.

EPIKHODOV. [Offended] Whether I work, or walk about, or eat, or play
billiards, is only a matter to be settled by people of understanding and
my elders.

VARYA. You dare to talk to me like that! [Furious] You dare? You mean
that I know nothing? Get out of here! This minute!

EPIKHODOV. [Nervous] I must ask you to express yourself more delicately.

VARYA. [Beside herself] Get out this minute. Get out! [He goes to the
door, she follows] Two-and-twenty troubles! I don’t want any sign of you
here! I don’t want to see anything of you! [EPIKHODOV has gone out; his
voice can be heard outside: “I’ll make a complaint against you.”] What,
coming back? [Snatches up the stick left by FIERS by the door] Go...
go... go, I’ll show you.... Are you going? Are you going? Well, then
take that. [She hits out as LOPAKHIN enters.]

LOPAKHIN. Much obliged.

VARYA. [Angry but amused] I’m sorry.

LOPAKHIN. Never mind. I thank you for my pleasant reception.

VARYA. It isn’t worth any thanks. [Walks away, then looks back and asks
gently] I didn’t hurt you, did I?

LOPAKHIN. No, not at all. There’ll be an enormous bump, that’s all.

VOICES FROM THE DRAWING-ROOM. Lopakhin’s returned! Ermolai Alexeyevitch!

PISCHIN. Now we’ll see what there is to see and hear what there is to
hear... [Kisses LOPAKHIN] You smell of cognac, my dear, my soul. And
we’re all having a good time.

[Enter LUBOV ANDREYEVNA.]

LUBOV. Is that you, Ermolai Alexeyevitch? Why were you so long? Where’s
Leonid?

LOPAKHIN. Leonid Andreyevitch came back with me, he’s coming....

LUBOV. [Excited] Well, what? Is it sold? Tell me?

LOPAKHIN. [Confused, afraid to show his pleasure] The sale ended up at
four o’clock.... We missed the train, and had to wait till half-past
nine. [Sighs heavily] Ooh! My head’s going round a little.

[Enter GAEV; in his right hand he carries things he has bought, with his
left he wipes away his tears.]

LUBOV. Leon, what’s happened? Leon, well? [Impatiently, in tears] Quick,
for the love of God....

GAEV. [Says nothing to her, only waves his hand; to FIERS, weeping]
Here, take this.... Here are anchovies, herrings from Kertch....
I’ve had no food to-day.... I have had a time! [The door from the
billiard-room is open; the clicking of the balls is heard, and YASHA’S
voice, “Seven, eighteen!” GAEV’S expression changes, he cries no more]
I’m awfully tired. Help me change my clothes, Fiers.

[Goes out through the drawing-room; FIERS after him.]

PISCHIN. What happened? Come on, tell us!

LUBOV. Is the cherry orchard sold?

LOPAKHIN. It is sold.

LUBOV. Who bought it?

LOPAKHIN. I bought it.

[LUBOV ANDREYEVNA is overwhelmed; she would fall if she were not
standing by an armchair and a table. VARYA takes her keys off her belt,
throws them on the floor, into the middle of the room and goes out.]

LOPAKHIN. I bought it! Wait, ladies and gentlemen, please, my head’s
going round, I can’t talk.... [Laughs] When we got to the sale,
Deriganov was there already. Leonid Andreyevitch had only fifteen
thousand roubles, and Deriganov offered thirty thousand on top of the
mortgage to begin with. I saw how matters were, so I grabbed hold of
him and bid forty. He went up to forty-five, I offered fifty-five. That
means he went up by fives and I went up by tens.... Well, it came to
an end. I bid ninety more than the mortgage; and it stayed with me. The
cherry orchard is mine now, mine! [Roars with laughter] My God, my God,
the cherry orchard’s mine! Tell me I’m drunk, or mad, or dreaming....
[Stamps his feet] Don’t laugh at me! If my father and grandfather rose
from their graves and looked at the whole affair, and saw how their
Ermolai, their beaten and uneducated Ermolai, who used to run barefoot
in the winter, how that very Ermolai has bought an estate, which is
the most beautiful thing in the world! I’ve bought the estate where my
grandfather and my father were slaves, where they weren’t even allowed
into the kitchen. I’m asleep, it’s only a dream, an illusion.... It’s
the fruit of imagination, wrapped in the fog of the unknown.... [Picks
up the keys, nicely smiling] She threw down the keys, she wanted to show
she was no longer mistress here.... [Jingles keys] Well, it’s all one!
[Hears the band tuning up] Eh, musicians, play, I want to hear you! Come
and look at Ermolai Lopakhin laying his axe to the cherry orchard,
come and look at the trees falling! We’ll build villas here, and our
grandsons and great-grandsons will see a new life here.... Play on,
music! [The band plays. LUBOV ANDREYEVNA sinks into a chair and weeps
bitterly. LOPAKHIN continues reproachfully] Why then, why didn’t you
take my advice? My poor, dear woman, you can’t go back now. [Weeps] Oh,
if only the whole thing was done with, if only our uneven, unhappy life
were changed!

PISCHIN. [Takes his arm; in an undertone] She’s crying. Let’s go into
the drawing-room and leave her by herself... come on.... [Takes his arm
and leads him out.]

LOPAKHIN. What’s that? Bandsmen, play nicely! Go on, do just as I want
you to! [Ironically] The new owner, the owner of the cherry orchard is
coming! [He accidentally knocks up against a little table and nearly
upsets the candelabra] I can pay for everything! [Exit with PISCHIN]

[In the reception-room and the drawing-room nobody remains except LUBOV
ANDREYEVNA, who sits huddled up and weeping bitterly. The band plays
softly. ANYA and TROFIMOV come in quickly. ANYA goes up to her
mother and goes on her knees in front of her. TROFIMOV stands at the
drawing-room entrance.]

ANYA. Mother! mother, are you crying? My dear, kind, good mother, my
beautiful mother, I love you! Bless you! The cherry orchard is sold,
we’ve got it no longer, it’s true, true, but don’t cry mother, you’ve
still got your life before you, you’ve still your beautiful pure soul...
Come with me, come, dear, away from here, come! We’ll plant a new
garden, finer than this, and you’ll see it, and you’ll understand, and
deep joy, gentle joy will sink into your soul, like the evening sun, and
you’ll smile, mother! Come, dear, let’s go!

Curtain.




ACT FOUR


[The stage is set as for Act I. There are no curtains on the windows, no
pictures; only a few pieces of furniture are left; they are piled up in
a corner as if for sale. The emptiness is felt. By the door that
leads out of the house and at the back of the stage, portmanteaux and
travelling paraphernalia are piled up. The door on the left is open; the
voices of VARYA and ANYA can be heard through it. LOPAKHIN stands and
waits. YASHA holds a tray with little tumblers of champagne. Outside,
EPIKHODOV is tying up a box. Voices are heard behind the stage. The
peasants have come to say good-bye. The voice of GAEV is heard: “Thank
you, brothers, thank you.”]

YASHA. The common people have come to say good-bye. I am of the
opinion, Ermolai Alexeyevitch, that they’re good people, but they don’t
understand very much.

[The voices die away. LUBOV ANDREYEVNA and GAEV enter. She is not crying
but is pale, and her face trembles; she can hardly speak.]

GAEV. You gave them your purse, Luba. You can’t go on like that, you
can’t!

LUBOV. I couldn’t help myself, I couldn’t! [They go out.]

LOPAKHIN. [In the doorway, calling after them] Please, I ask you most
humbly! Just a little glass to say good-bye. I didn’t remember to bring
any from town and I only found one bottle at the station. Please, do!
[Pause] Won’t you really have any? [Goes away from the door] If I only
knew--I wouldn’t have bought any. Well, I shan’t drink any either.
[YASHA carefully puts the tray on a chair] You have a drink, Yasha, at
any rate.

YASHA. To those departing! And good luck to those who stay behind!
[Drinks] I can assure you that this isn’t real champagne.

LOPAKHIN. Eight roubles a bottle. [Pause] It’s devilish cold here.

YASHA. There are no fires to-day, we’re going away. [Laughs]

LOPAKHIN. What’s the matter with you?

YASHA. I’m just pleased.

LOPAKHIN. It’s October outside, but it’s as sunny and as quiet as if
it were summer. Good for building. [Looking at his watch and speaking
through the door] Ladies and gentlemen, please remember that it’s only
forty-seven minutes till the train goes! You must go off to the station
in twenty minutes. Hurry up.

[TROFIMOV, in an overcoat, comes in from the grounds.]

TROFIMOV. I think it’s time we went. The carriages are waiting. Where
the devil are my goloshes? They’re lost. [Through the door] Anya, I
can’t find my goloshes! I can’t!

LOPAKHIN. I’ve got to go to Kharkov. I’m going in the same train as you.
I’m going to spend the whole winter in Kharkov. I’ve been hanging about
with you people, going rusty without work. I can’t live without working.
I must have something to do with my hands; they hang about as if they
weren’t mine at all.

TROFIMOV. We’ll go away now and then you’ll start again on your useful
labours.

LOPAKHIN. Have a glass.

TROFIMOV. I won’t.

LOPAKHIN. So you’re off to Moscow now?

TROFIMOV Yes. I’ll see them into town and to-morrow I’m off to Moscow.

LOPAKHIN. Yes.... I expect the professors don’t lecture nowadays;
they’re waiting till you turn up!

TROFIMOV. That’s not your business.

LOPAKHIN. How many years have you been going to the university?

TROFIMOV. Think of something fresh. This is old and flat. [Looking for
his goloshes] You know, we may not meet each other again, so just let me
give you a word of advice on parting: “Don’t wave your hands about! Get
rid of that habit of waving them about. And then, building villas and
reckoning on their residents becoming freeholders in time--that’s the
same thing; it’s all a matter of waving your hands about.... Whether
I want to or not, you know, I like you. You’ve thin, delicate fingers,
like those of an artist, and you’ve a thin, delicate soul....”

LOPAKHIN. [Embraces him] Good-bye, dear fellow. Thanks for all you’ve
said. If you want any, take some money from me for the journey.

TROFIMOV. Why should I? I don’t want it.

LOPAKHIN. But you’ve nothing!

TROFIMOV. Yes, I have, thank you; I’ve got some for a translation. Here
it is in my pocket. [Nervously] But I can’t find my goloshes!

VARYA. [From the other room] Take your rubbish away! [Throws a pair of
rubber goloshes on to the stage.]

TROFIMOV. Why are you angry, Varya? Hm! These aren’t my goloshes!

LOPAKHIN. In the spring I sowed three thousand acres of poppies, and now
I’ve made forty thousand roubles net profit. And when my poppies were
in flower, what a picture it was! So I, as I was saying, made forty
thousand roubles, and I mean I’d like to lend you some, because I can
afford it. Why turn up your nose at it? I’m just a simple peasant....

TROFIMOV. Your father was a peasant, mine was a chemist, and that means
absolutely nothing. [LOPAKHIN takes out his pocket-book] No, no....
Even if you gave me twenty thousand I should refuse. I’m a free man. And
everything that all you people, rich and poor, value so highly and so
dearly hasn’t the least influence over me; it’s like a flock of down in
the wind. I can do without you, I can pass you by. I’m strong and proud.
Mankind goes on to the highest truths and to the highest happiness such
as is only possible on earth, and I go in the front ranks!

LOPAKHIN. Will you get there?

TROFIMOV. I will. [Pause] I’ll get there and show others the way. [Axes
cutting the trees are heard in the distance.]

LOPAKHIN. Well, good-bye, old man. It’s time to go. Here we stand
pulling one another’s noses, but life goes its own way all the time.
When I work for a long time, and I don’t get tired, then I think more
easily, and I think I get to understand why I exist. And there are so
many people in Russia, brother, who live for nothing at all. Still, work
goes on without that. Leonid Andreyevitch, they say, has accepted a post
in a bank; he will get sixty thousand roubles a year.... But he won’t
stand it; he’s very lazy.

ANYA. [At the door] Mother asks if you will stop them cutting down the
orchard until she has gone away.

TROFIMOV. Yes, really, you ought to have enough tact not to do that.
[Exit.]

LOPAKHIN, All right, all right... yes, he’s right. [Exit.]

ANYA. Has Fiers been sent to the hospital?

YASHA. I gave the order this morning. I suppose they’ve sent him.

ANYA. [To EPIKHODOV, who crosses the room] Simeon Panteleyevitch, please
make inquiries if Fiers has been sent to the hospital.

YASHA. [Offended] I told Egor this morning. What’s the use of asking ten
times!

EPIKHODOV. The aged Fiers, in my conclusive opinion, isn’t worth
mending; his forefathers had better have him. I only envy him. [Puts
a trunk on a hat-box and squashes it] Well, of course. I thought so!
[Exit.]

YASHA. [Grinning] Two-and-twenty troubles.

VARYA. [Behind the door] Has Fiers been taken away to the hospital?

ANYA. Yes.

VARYA. Why didn’t they take the letter to the doctor?

ANYA. It’ll have to be sent after him. [Exit.]

VARYA. [In the next room] Where’s Yasha? Tell him his mother’s come and
wants to say good-bye to him.

YASHA. [Waving his hand] She’ll make me lose all patience!

[DUNYASHA has meanwhile been bustling round the luggage; now that YASHA
is left alone, she goes up to him.]

DUNYASHA. If you only looked at me once, Yasha. You’re going away,
leaving me behind.

[Weeps and hugs him round the neck.]

YASHA. What’s the use of crying? [Drinks champagne] In six days I’ll be
again in Paris. To-morrow we get into the express and off we go. I can
hardly believe it. Vive la France! It doesn’t suit me here, I can’t live
here... it’s no good. Well, I’ve seen the uncivilized world; I have had
enough of it. [Drinks champagne] What do you want to cry for? You behave
yourself properly, and then you won’t cry.

DUNYASHA. [Looks in a small mirror and powders her face] Send me a
letter from Paris. You know I loved you, Yasha, so much! I’m a sensitive
creature, Yasha.

YASHA. Somebody’s coming.

[He bustles around the luggage, singing softly. Enter LUBOV ANDREYEVNA,
GAEV, ANYA, and CHARLOTTA IVANOVNA.]

GAEV. We’d better be off. There’s no time left. [Looks at YASHA]
Somebody smells of herring!

LUBOV. We needn’t get into our carriages for ten minutes.... [Looks
round the room] Good-bye, dear house, old grandfather. The winter will
go, the spring will come, and then you’ll exist no more, you’ll be
pulled down. How much these walls have seen! [Passionately kisses her
daughter] My treasure, you’re radiant, your eyes flash like two jewels!
Are you happy? Very?

ANYA. Very! A new life is beginning, mother!

GAEV. [Gaily] Yes, really, everything’s all right now. Before the cherry
orchard was sold we all were excited and we suffered, and then, when
the question was solved once and for all, we all calmed down, and even
became cheerful. I’m a bank official now, and a financier... red in the
middle; and you, Luba, for some reason or other, look better, there’s no
doubt about it.

LUBOV Yes. My nerves are better, it’s true. [She puts on her coat and
hat] I sleep well. Take my luggage out, Yasha. It’s time. [To ANYA] My
little girl, we’ll soon see each other again.... I’m off to Paris. I’ll
live there on the money your grandmother from Yaroslav sent along to buy
the estate--bless her!--though it won’t last long.

ANYA. You’ll come back soon, soon, mother, won’t you? I’ll get ready,
and pass the exam at the Higher School, and then I’ll work and help
you. We’ll read all sorts of books to one another, won’t we? [Kisses
her mother’s hands] We’ll read in the autumn evenings; we’ll read
many books, and a beautiful new world will open up before us....
[Thoughtfully] You’ll come, mother....

LUBOV. I’ll come, my darling. [Embraces her.]

[Enter LOPAKHIN. CHARLOTTA is singing to herself.]

GAEV. Charlotta is happy; she sings!

CHARLOTTA. [Takes a bundle, looking like a wrapped-up baby] My little
baby, bye-bye. [The baby seems to answer, “Oua! Oua!”] Hush, my nice
little boy. [“Oua! Oua!”] I’m so sorry for you! [Throws the bundle back]
So please find me a new place. I can’t go on like this.

LOPAKHIN. We’ll find one, Charlotta Ivanovna, don’t you be afraid.

GAEV. Everybody’s leaving us. Varya’s going away... we’ve suddenly
become unnecessary.

CHARLOTTA. I’ve nowhere to live in town. I must go away. [Hums] Never
mind.

[Enter PISCHIN.]

LOPAKHIN. Nature’s marvel!

PISCHIN. [Puffing] Oh, let me get my breath back.... I’m fagged out...
My most honoured, give me some water....

GAEV. Come for money, what? I’m your humble servant, and I’m going out
of the way of temptation. [Exit.]

PISCHIN. I haven’t been here for ever so long... dear madam. [To
LOPAKHIN] You here? Glad to see you... man of immense brain... take
this... take it.... [Gives LOPAKHIN money] Four hundred roubles.... That
leaves 840....

LOPAKHIN. [Shrugs his shoulders in surprise] As if I were dreaming.
Where did you get this from?

PISCHIN. Stop... it’s hot.... A most unexpected thing happened. Some
Englishmen came along and found some white clay on my land.... [To LUBOV
ANDREYEVNA] And here’s four hundred for you... beautiful lady.... [Gives
her money] Give you the rest later.... [Drinks water] Just now a young
man in the train was saying that some great philosopher advises us all
to jump off roofs. “Jump!” he says, and that’s all. [Astonished] To
think of that, now! More water!

LOPAKHIN. Who were these Englishmen?

PISCHIN. I’ve leased off the land with the clay to them for twenty-four
years.... Now, excuse me, I’ve no time.... I must run off.... I must
go to Znoikov and to Kardamonov... I owe them all money.... [Drinks]
Good-bye. I’ll come in on Thursday.

LUBOV. We’re just off to town, and to-morrow I go abroad.

PISCHIN. [Agitated] What? Why to town? I see furniture... trunks....
Well, never mind. [Crying] Never mind. These Englishmen are men of
immense intellect.... Never mind.... Be happy.... God will help you....
Never mind.... Everything in this world comes to an end.... [Kisses
LUBOV ANDREYEVNA’S hand] And if you should happen to hear that my end
has come, just remember this old... horse and say: “There was one
such and such a Simeonov-Pischin, God bless his soul....” Wonderful
weather... yes.... [Exit deeply moved, but returns at once and says in
the door] Dashenka sent her love! [Exit.]

LUBOV. Now we can go. I’ve two anxieties, though. The first is poor
Fiers [Looks at her watch] We’ve still five minutes....

ANYA. Mother, Fiers has already been sent to the hospital. Yasha sent
him off this morning.

LUBOV. The second is Varya. She’s used to getting up early and to work,
and now she’s no work to do she’s like a fish out of water. She’s grown
thin and pale, and she cries, poor thing.... [Pause] You know very well,
Ermolai Alexeyevitch, that I used to hope to marry her to you, and I
suppose you are going to marry somebody? [Whispers to ANYA, who nods to
CHARLOTTA, and they both go out] She loves you, she’s your sort, and I
don’t understand, I really don’t, why you seem to be keeping away from
each other. I don’t understand!

LOPAKHIN. To tell the truth, I don’t understand it myself. It’s all so
strange.... If there’s still time, I’ll be ready at once... Let’s get it
over, once and for all; I don’t feel as if I could ever propose to her
without you.

LUBOV. Excellent. It’ll only take a minute. I’ll call her.

LOPAKHIN. The champagne’s very appropriate. [Looking at the tumblers]
They’re empty, somebody’s already drunk them. [YASHA coughs] I call that
licking it up....

LUBOV. [Animated] Excellent. We’ll go out. Yasha, allez. I’ll call her
in.... [At the door] Varya, leave that and come here. Come! [Exit with
YASHA.]

LOPAKHIN. [Looks at his watch] Yes.... [Pause.]

[There is a restrained laugh behind the door, a whisper, then VARYA
comes in.]

VARYA. [Looking at the luggage in silence] I can’t seem to find it....

LOPAKHIN. What are you looking for?

VARYA. I packed it myself and I don’t remember. [Pause.]

LOPAKHIN. Where are you going to now, Barbara Mihailovna?

VARYA. I? To the Ragulins.... I’ve got an agreement to go and look after
their house... as housekeeper or something.

LOPAKHIN. Is that at Yashnevo? It’s about fifty miles. [Pause] So life
in this house is finished now....

VARYA. [Looking at the luggage] Where is it?... perhaps I’ve put it away
in the trunk.... Yes, there’ll be no more life in this house....

LOPAKHIN. And I’m off to Kharkov at once... by this train. I’ve a lot of
business on hand. I’m leaving Epikhodov here... I’ve taken him on.

VARYA. Well, well!

LOPAKHIN. Last year at this time the snow was already falling, if you
remember, and now it’s nice and sunny. Only it’s rather cold.... There’s
three degrees of frost.

VARYA. I didn’t look. [Pause] And our thermometer’s broken.... [Pause.]

VOICE AT THE DOOR. Ermolai Alexeyevitch!

LOPAKHIN. [As if he has long been waiting to be called] This minute.
[Exit quickly.]

[VARYA, sitting on the floor, puts her face on a bundle of clothes and
weeps gently. The door opens. LUBOV ANDREYEVNA enters carefully.]

LUBOV. Well? [Pause] We must go.

VARYA. [Not crying now, wipes her eyes] Yes, it’s quite time, little
mother. I’ll get to the Ragulins to-day, if I don’t miss the train....

LUBOV. [At the door] Anya, put on your things. [Enter ANYA, then GAEV,
CHARLOTTA IVANOVNA. GAEV wears a warm overcoat with a cape. A servant
and drivers come in. EPIKHODOV bustles around the luggage] Now we can go
away.

ANYA. [Joyfully] Away!

GAEV. My friends, my dear friends! Can I be silent, in leaving this
house for evermore?--can I restrain myself, in saying farewell, from
expressing those feelings which now fill my whole being...?

ANYA. [Imploringly] Uncle!

VARYA. Uncle, you shouldn’t!

GAEV. [Stupidly] Double the red into the middle.... I’ll be quiet.

[Enter TROFIMOV, then LOPAKHIN.]

TROFIMOV. Well, it’s time to be off.

LOPAKHIN. Epikhodov, my coat!

LUBOV. I’ll sit here one more minute. It’s as if I’d never really
noticed what the walls and ceilings of this house were like, and now I
look at them greedily, with such tender love....

GAEV. I remember, when I was six years old, on Trinity Sunday, I sat at
this window and looked and saw my father going to church....

LUBOV. Have all the things been taken away?

LOPAKHIN. Yes, all, I think. [To EPIKHODOV, putting on his coat] You see
that everything’s quite straight, Epikhodov.

EPIKHODOV. [Hoarsely] You may depend upon me, Ermolai Alexeyevitch!

LOPAKHIN. What’s the matter with your voice?

EPIKHODOV. I swallowed something just now; I was having a drink of
water.

YASHA. [Suspiciously] What manners....

LUBOV. We go away, and not a soul remains behind.

LOPAKHIN. Till the spring.

VARYA. [Drags an umbrella out of a bundle, and seems to be waving it
about. LOPAKHIN appears to be frightened] What are you doing?... I never
thought...

TROFIMOV. Come along, let’s take our seats... it’s time! The train will
be in directly.

VARYA. Peter, here they are, your goloshes, by that trunk. [In tears]
And how old and dirty they are....

TROFIMOV. [Putting them on] Come on!

GAEV. [Deeply moved, nearly crying] The train... the station.... Cross
in the middle, a white double in the corner....

LUBOV. Let’s go!

LOPAKHIN. Are you all here? There’s nobody else? [Locks the side-door on
the left] There’s a lot of things in there. I must lock them up. Come!

ANYA. Good-bye, home! Good-bye, old life!

TROFIMOV. Welcome, new life! [Exit with ANYA.]

[VARYA looks round the room and goes out slowly. YASHA and CHARLOTTA,
with her little dog, go out.]

LOPAKHIN. Till the spring, then! Come on... till we meet again! [Exit.]

[LUBOV ANDREYEVNA and GAEV are left alone. They might almost have been
waiting for that. They fall into each other’s arms and sob restrainedly
and quietly, fearing that somebody might hear them.]

GAEV. [In despair] My sister, my sister....

LUBOV. My dear, my gentle, beautiful orchard! My life, my youth, my
happiness, good-bye! Good-bye!

ANYA’S VOICE. [Gaily] Mother!

TROFIMOV’S VOICE. [Gaily, excited] Coo-ee!

LUBOV. To look at the walls and the windows for the last time.... My
dead mother used to like to walk about this room....

GAEV. My sister, my sister!

ANYA’S VOICE. Mother!

TROFIMOV’S VOICE. Coo-ee!

LUBOV. We’re coming! [They go out.]

[The stage is empty. The sound of keys being turned in the locks is
heard, and then the noise of the carriages going away. It is quiet. Then
the sound of an axe against the trees is heard in the silence sadly and
by itself. Steps are heard. FIERS comes in from the door on the right.
He is dressed as usual, in a short jacket and white waistcoat; slippers
on his feet. He is ill. He goes to the door and tries the handle.]

FIERS. It’s locked. They’ve gone away. [Sits on a sofa] They’ve
forgotten about me.... Never mind, I’ll sit here.... And Leonid
Andreyevitch will have gone in a light overcoat instead of putting on
his fur coat.... [Sighs anxiously] I didn’t see.... Oh, these young
people! [Mumbles something that cannot be understood] Life’s gone on as
if I’d never lived. [Lying down] I’ll lie down.... You’ve no strength
left in you, nothing left at all.... Oh, you... bungler!

[He lies without moving. The distant sound is heard, as if from the sky,
of a breaking string, dying away sadly. Silence follows it, and only the
sound is heard, some way away in the orchard, of the axe falling on the
trees.